Minya Menta Yohanneo

[The] First Letter of John

---

RANTA 1
Ya enge i yestallo, ya hlasselme, ya ecénielme hendulmanten, ya eyétielme ar málmat paltanet pa i quetta coiviéno 2 – é i coivie náne apantaina, ar ecénielmes ar *vettalme ar nyarilme len pa i oira coivie ya enge as i Atar ar náne apantaina men – 3 ta ya ecénielme ar hlasselme nyáralme yando len, i yando lé samuva ranta aselme. Ar menya ranta ná as i Atar ar as Yésus Hristo Yondorya. 4 Ar sie técalme nati sine, i alasselma nauva quanta.
	5 Ar si ná i menta ya ahlárielme sello ar nyáralme len, i Eru cala ná, ar mornie laume ea sesse. 6 Qui quetilve i samilve ranta óse, ananta vantalve i morniesse, húralve ar uar care i nanwie. 7 Ono qui vantalve i calasse tambe sé ea i calasse, samilve ranta quén as i exe, ar i serce Yésus Yondoryo vi-sove ilya úcarello.
	8 Qui quetilve i ualve same úcare, *útulyalve inwe ar i nanwie lá ea vesse. 9 Qui *etequentalve úcarelvar, náse voronda ar faila apsenien ven úcarelvar ar vi-sovien ilya *úfailiello. 10 Qui quetilve i ualve úacárie, carilves *hurindo, ar quettarya lá ea vesse.  

CHAPTER 1
[That] which existed from the beginning, which we heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have beheld and our hands have felt concerning the word of life 2 – indeed the life was revealed, and we have seen it and witness and tell you about the eternal life that was with the Father and was revealed to us – 3 that which we have seen and we heard we are telling also to you, that also you will have a part [or, a share] with us. And our part is with the Father and with Jesus Christ his Son. 4 And so we are writing these things, that our joy will be full.
	5 And this is the message that we have heard from him and we are telling you, that God is light, and there is not at all [any] darkness in him. 6 If we say that we have a part with him, and yet we walk in the dark, we are lying and do not do [or, practice] the truth. 7 But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have a part [or, share] one with the other, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.
	8 If we say that we do not have sin, we mislead ourselves and the truth is not in us. 9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins and cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 10 If we say that we do not sin, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

RANTA 2
Hinyar, técan lenna nati sine i ualde úcaruva. Ar qui aiquen é úcaruva, samilve şámo as i Atar: Yésus Hristo, i Faila. 2 Ar náse tópala *yanca úcarelvain, ananta lá *venyain erinque, mal i quanda mardo. 3 Ar sie samilve i istya i istalve sé: qui himyalve axanyar. 4 Ye quete: ”Istanyes”, mal axanyar uas himya, sé *hurindo ná, ar i nanwie lá ea mi síte quén. 5 Mal aiquen ye himya quettarya, mi sé i melme Eruo ná carna ilvana. Sinen istalve i nalve sesse. 6 Yen quete i náse sesse mauya vantie ve sé vantane. 

CHAPTER 2
My children, I am writing these things to you that you will not sin. And if anyone does sin, we have a helper with the Father: Jesus Christ, the Righteous [One]. 2 And he is a covering [= atoning] sacrifice for our sins, and yet not for ours alone, but the whole world’s. 3 And thus we have the knowledge that we know him:  if we abide by his commandments. 4 [He] who says: ”I know him”, but by his commandments he does not abide, he is a liar, and the truth is not in such a person. 5 But anyone who abides by his words, in him the love of God is made perfect. By this we know that we are in him. 6 For the one who says that he is in him it is necessary to walk as he walked.

	7 Meldar, uan tece lenna vinya axan, mal yára axan ya sámelde i yestallo. Yára axan sina ná i quetta ya hlasselde. 8 Ata, tecin lenna vinya axan, ya ná nanwa sen ar len, pan i mornie auta, ar i nanwa cala caltea yando sí.
	9 Ye quete i eas i calasse, ananta yeltas hánorya, ea en i morniesse. 10 Ye mele hánorya lemya i calasse, ar sesse ea munta ya tyare aiquen lanta. 11 Mal ye yelta hánorya ea i morniesse ar vanta i morniesse, ar uas ista yasse ménas, pan i mornie acárie henyat *cénelóre.

	7 Beloved ones, I do not write to you a new commandment, but an old commandment that you had from the beginning. This old commandment is the word that you heard. 8 Again, I write to you a new commandment, which is true for him and for you, since the darkness is passing, and the true light is shining even now. 
	9 [He] who says that he is in the light, and yet he hates his brother, is still in the darkness. 10 [He] who loves his brother remains in the light, and in him there is nothing that causes anyone to fall. 11 But [he] who hates his brother is in the darkness and walks in the darkness, and he does not know where he is going, for the darkness has made his eyes blind.

	12 Técan lenna, híni, pan úcareldar nar apsénine len esseryanen.
	13 Técan lenna, atari, pan istalde ye ea i yestallo. Técan lenna, nessar, pan *orutúrielde i Olca. Técan lenna, híni, pan istalde i Atar. 
	14 Técan lenna, atari, pan istalde ye ea i yestallo. Técan lenna, nessar, pan nalde polde ar Eruo quetta lemya lesse, ar *orutúrielde i Olca.
	15 Áva mele i mar hya yar ear i mardesse. Qui aiquen mele i mar, i melme i Atarwa lá ea sesse, 16 pan ilqua ya ea i mardesse – i hráveo maile ar i henduo maile ar i *valate tyárina almanen – ui i Ataro, mal i mardo. 17 Ar i mar auta, ar sie care mailerya, mal ye care Eruo indóme lemya tennoio.

	12 I am writing to you, children, because your sins are forgiven you by means of his name.
	13 I am writing to you, fathers, because you know [him] who is from the beginning. I am writing to you, youths, because you have conquered the Wicked One. I am writing to you, children, because you know the Father.
	14 I am writing to you, fathers, because you know [him] who is from the beginning. I am writing to you, youths, because you are strong and God’s word remains in you, and you have conquered the Wicked One.
	15 Do not love the world or [the things] that are in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love for the Father is not in him, 16 since everything that is in the world – the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes and the pride caused by wealth – is not of the Father, but of the world. 7 And the world passes away, and so does its lust, but [he] who does God’s will remains forever.

	18 Hinyar, si ná i métima lúme, ar ve ahlárielde i túla i *Anahristo, yando sí ear rimbe *Anahristoli. Sie istalve i si ná i métima lúme. 19 *Etemennelte vello, mal úmelte nostalelvo, an qui anelte nostalelvo, lemyanelte aselve. Mal martanes i umne tanaina i umilte illi nostalelvo. 20 Ar lé samir *livyale i Airillo; illi mici le samir istya. 21 Tecin lenna, lá pan ualde ista i nanwie, mal pan istaldes, ar pan lá ea huru ya tule i nanwiello. 
	22 Man ná i *hurindo, qui lá ye lala i Yésus ná i Hristo? Si ná i *Anahristo, sé ye lala i Atar yo i Yondo. 23 Ilquen ye pene i Yondo yando pene i Atar. Ye *etequenta i Yondo *etequenta yando i Atar. 24 Lé, lava yan ahlárielde i yestallo lemya lesse. Qui ya ahlárielde i yestallo lemya lesse, yando lé lemyuvar mí Yondo yo i Atar. 25 Ar si ná i vanda ya antanes ven: oira coivie. 
	26 Nati sine tecin lenna pa i nevir *útulya le. 27 Ar lé – i *livyale ya camnelde sello lemya lesse, ar ualde same maure i aiquen peanta len. An sá peanta len pa ilqua, ar nas nanwa ar pen huru. Ve sá peánie len, á lemya sesse. 28 Ar sí, hinyar, alde lemya sesse, i, íre nauvas apantaina, samuvalve lérie quetiéva ar lá nauvalve naityane oa sello tulesseryasse. 29 Qui istalde i náse faila, istalde i ilquen ye care failie anaie nóna sénen.

	18 My children, this is the last hour, and as you have heard that the Antichrist is coming, even now there are numerous Antichrists. Thus we know that this is the last hour. 19 They went forth from us, but they were not of our kind, for if they were of our kind, they [would have] remained with us. But it happened so that [it] would be shown that they are not all of our kind. 20 For you have an annointing from the Holy One; all among you have knowledge. 21 I write to you, not because you do not know the truth, but because you know it, and because there is not [any] lie that comes from the truth.
	22 Who is the liar, if not [he] who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the Antichrist, he that denies the Father and the Son. 23 Everyone who lacks the Son also lacks the Father. [He] who confesses the Son confesses also the Father. 24 You, let [that] which you have heard from the beginning remain in you. If [that] which you have heard from the beginning remains in you, you too will remain in the Son and the Father. 25 And this is the promise that he gave us: eternal life.
	26 These things I write to you concerning those who try to mislead you. 27 And you – the annointment that you received from him remains in you, and you do not have need that anyone teaches you. For it teaches you about everything, and it is true and without lie. Like it has taught you, remain in him. 28 And now, my children, you remain [imperative!] in him, that, when he shall be revealed, you will have freeness of speech and we shall not be shamed away from him at his coming. 29 If you know that he is righteous, you know that everybody who does [or, practices] righteousness has been born by him.

RANTA 3
Yé i nostale melmeo ya i Atar ánie ven, i umnelve estaine Eruhíni, ar ta nalve. Etta i mar ua ista ve, pan sé uas isintie. 2 Meldar, sí nalve Eruhíni, mal en ua apantaina ya nauvalve. Istalve i íre sé nauva apantaina nauvalve ve sé, an cenuvalves ve náse. 3 Ar ilquen ye same estel sina sesse, poita immo ve sé ná poica.
	4 Ilquen ye care úcare yando care *şanyelórie, ar úcare ná *şanyelórie. 5 Ar istalde i sé náne apaintaina mapien oa úcari, ar lá ea úcare sesse. 6 Ilquen lemyala sesse ua úcare; *úquen ye úcare var ecénie se var isintie se. 7 Hinyar, lava úquenen *útulya le; ye care failie faila ná, tambe sé ná faila. 
	8 Ye care úcare ho i Arauco ná, pan i Arauco úacárie i yestallo. Casta sinan i Eruion náne apantaina: nancarien i Arauco cardar. 
	9 Ilquen ye anaie nóna Erullo ua care úcare, pan erderya lemya sesse, ar uas pole úcare, pan anaies nóna Erullo. 10 I híni Eruo ar i híni i Arauco nar apantaine sinen: Ilquen ye ua care failie ui Eruo, yando lá ye ua mele hánorya. 11 An si ná i menta ya ahlárielde i yestallo: samie melme quén i exeva, 12 lá ve Cain, ye náne i Olco ar nahtane hánorya. Ar mana i casta yanen se-nahtanes? Pan vére cardaryar náner ulce, mal hánoryo cardar faile.

CHAPTER 3
Behold the kind of love that the Father has given us, that we were going to be called children of God, and that we are. Therefore the world does not know us, since it has not known him. 2 Beloved ones, now we are children of God, but still [it] is not revealed what we will be. We know that when he shall be revealed we will be like him, and we shall see him as he is. 3 And everybody who has this hope in him, purifies [him]self as he is clean. 
	4 Everybody who does [or, commits] sin also does lawlessness, for sin is lawlessness. 5 And you know that he was revealed to take away sins, and [there] is not [any] sin in him. 6 Everyone remaining in him does not sin, nobody who sins has either seen him or known him. 7 My children, let nobody mislead you; [he] who does righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous.
	8 [He] who does sin is from the Devil, since the Devil has sinned from the beginning. For this reason the Son of God was revealed: to undo the deeds [or, works] of the Devil.
	9 Everyone who has been born from God does not do [or, commit] sin, since his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, since he has been born from God. 10 The children of God and the children of the Devil are revealed by this: Everyone who does not do righteousness is not of God, also not [he] who does not love his brother. 11 For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning: to have love one for the other, 12 not like Cain, who was of the Wicked One and killed his brother. And what is the reason by which he killed him? Because his own deeds were evil, but his brother’s deeds righteous. 

	13 Áva fele elmenda, hánor, qui i mar yelta le. 14 Istalve i oantielve ñurullo coivienna, pan melilve i hánor. Ye ua mele lemya ñurusse. 15 Ilquen ye yelta hánorya *atannahtar ná, ar istalde i lá ea *atannahtar ye same oira coivie lemyala sesse. 16 Sinen istalve melmerya,  pan sé antane coivierya elven, ar ná rohtalva antie coivielva hánolvain. 17 Mal ye ná lára mar sinasse ar cene hánorya arwa maureo, ananta holtas i fenna *ofelmeryo sen –  manen Eruo melme lemya sesse? 18 Hinyar, alve mele, lá quettanen hya lambanen, mal cardanen ar nanwiénen. 
	19 Sinen istuvalve i nalve i nanwiéno, ar panyuvalve endalva séresse epe se. 20 An qui endalva *ulquete ve, Eru ná túra lá endalva ar ista ilye nati. 21 Meldar, qui endalva ua *ulquete ve, samilve lérie quetiéva epe Eru, 22 ar *aiqua ya arcalve camilve sello, pan himyalve axanyar ar carir yar nar máre henyant. 23 Ar si ná axanya, i savilve mí esse Yésus Hristo Yondoryo ar melir quén i exe, ve cannes ven. 
	24 Ente, ye himya axanya lemya sesse, ar sé immo i exesse, ar sie istalve i lemyas vesse, i fairenen ya ven-antanes.

	13 Do not feel wonder, brothers, if the world hates you. 14 We know that we have passed from death to life, since we love the brothers. [He] who does not love remains in death. 15 Everyone who hates his brother is a manslayer, and you not that [there] is not [any] manslayer who has eternal life remaining in him. 16 By this we know his love, because he gave his life for us, and [it] is our debt to give our life for our brothers. 17 But [he] who is rich in this world and sees his brother having need, and yet he shuts the door of his compassion to him – how does God love remain in him? 18 My children, let us love, not by word or by tongue, but by deed and by truth.
19 By this we shall know that we are of the truth, and we shall set our heart at rest before him. 20 For if our heart accuses us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things. 21 Beloved ones, if your heart does not accuse us, we have freeness of speech before God, 22 and anything that we request we receive from him, since we abide by his commandments and do [the things] that are good to his eyes. 23 For this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of Jesus Christ his Son and love one another, as he commanded us.
	24 Furthermore, [he] who abides by his commandment remains in him, and he himself in the other, and so we know that he remains in us, by the spirit that he gave us. 

RANTA 4
Meldar, áva save ilya fairesse, mal á tyasta i fairi cenien qui nalte Eruo, pan rimbe *hurutercánoli *eteménier mir i mar. 
	2 Sinen istalde Eruo faire: Ilya faire ye *etequenta Yésus Hristo túlienwa i hrávesse ná Eruo, 3 mal ilya faire ye ua *etequenta Yésus Hristo ui Eruo. Ar si ná i *Anahristo faire, pa ya hlasselde i anes túlala, ar yando sí eas i mardesse. 4 Lé nar Eruo, hinyar, ar *orutúrielde te, pan ye ea lesse ná túra lá ye ea i mardesse. 5 Té nar i mardo; etta quetilte i mardo lénen, ar i mar lasta téna. 6 Vé nar Eruo.Ye ista Eru lasta venna; ye ui Eruo ua lasta venna. Sie istalve i faire nanwiéno ar i faire huruo. 
	7 Meldar, alve mele quén i exe, pan melme ná Eruo, ar ilquen ye mele ná nóna Eruo ar ista Eru. 8 Ye ua mele ua ista Eru, pan Eru ná melme. 9 Sinen Eruo melme náne apantaina imíca ve: Eru mentane *ernóna Yondorya mir i mar, i pollelve same coivie sénen. 10 Melme ná apantaina mi si, lá i elve emélier Eru, mal i sé méle vé ar mentane Yondorya ve tópala *yanca úcarelvain.

CHAPTER 4
Beloved ones, do not believe in every spirit, but test the spirits to see if they are of God, for numerous false prophets have gone out into the world.
	2 By this you know God’s spirit: Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ [as] come in the flesh is of God, 3 but every spirit that does not confess Jesus Christ is not of God. And this is the Antichrist’s spirit, of which you heard that it was coming, and even now it is in the world. 4 You are of God, my children, and you have conquered them, since [he] who is in you is greater than [he] who is in the world. 5 They are of the world; therefore they speak by the world’s manner, and the world listens to them. 6 We are of God. [He] who knows God listens to us; he who is not of God does not listen to us. Thus we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of lie.
	7 Beloved ones, let us love one another, since love is of God, and everyone who loves is born of God and knows God. 8 [He] who does not love does not know God, because God is love. 9 By this God’s love was revealed among us: God sent his only-born Son into the world, that we could have life by him. 10 Love is revealed in this, not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son as an atoning [tópala, ”covering”] sacrifice for our sins.

	11 Meldar, qui Eru vi-emélie sie, rohtalva ná i yando vé melir quén i exe. 12 *Úquen oi ecénie Eru. Qui melilve quén i exe, Eru lemya vesse ar melmerya ná carna ilvana vesse. 13 Sinen istalve i sesse lemyalve, ar sé vesse, pan ánies ven et faireryo. 14 Ar elve ecénier ar *evettier i ementie i Atar Yondorya ve *Rehtando i mardo. 15 Aiquen ye *etequenta i Yésus Hristo i Eruion ná, sesse Eru lemya, ar sé Erusse. 16 Ar elve istar ar asávier i melme ya Eru same elveva.
	Eru ná melme, ar ye lemya melmesse lemya Erusse, ar Eru lemya sesse. 17 Sie melme ná carna ilvana aselve, i samuvalve lérie quetiéva i auresse anamo. An tambe sé ná, sie yando elve nar i mar sinasse. 18 Lá ea caure melmesse, mal ilvana melme hate caure etsenna, pan caure cole paime as imma. Ye ruce ui carna ilvana melmesse. 19 Elve melir, pan sé méle vé minyave.
	20 Qui aiquen quete: ”Melin Eru”, ananta yeltas hánorya, sé *hurindo ná. An ye ua mele hánorya ye ecénies, ua pole mele Eru ye uas ecénie. 21 Ar axan sina samilve sello, i mauya yen mele Eru mele yando hánorya.

	11 Beloved ones, if God has loved us so, our debt is that also we love one another. 12 No one has ever seen God. If we love one another, God remains in us and his love is made perfect in us. 13 By this we know that in him we remain, and he in us, because he has given us out of his spirit. 14 And we have seen and have witnessed that the Father has sent his Son as Savior of the world. 15 Anyone who confesses that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, in him God remains, and he in God. 16 And you know and have believed [in] the love that God has for us.
	God is love, and [he] who remains in love remains in God, and God remains in him. 17 Thus love is made perfect with us, that we will have freedom of speech on the day of doom. For as he is, so also we are in this world. 18 There is no fear in love, since perfect love throws fear out, because fear carries punishment with itself. [He] who fears is not made perfect in love. 19 We love, since he loved us first.
	20 If anyone says: ”I love God”, and yet he hates his brother, he is a liar. For [he] who does not love his brother whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen. 21 And this commandment we have from him, that [it] is necessary to [him] who loves God to love also his brother. 

RANTA 5
Ilquen ye save i Yésus ná i Hristo ná nóna Eruo, ar ilquen ye mele i Atar meluva ye náne nóna sénen. 2 Sinen istalve i melilve i Eruhíni, íre mélalve Eru ar cárar axanyar. 3 An si ná i melme Eruva, i himyalve axanyar. Ar axanyar umir lumne, 4 pan ilqua ya ná nóna Eruo *orture i mar. Ar si ná i apaire ya *orutúrie i mar: savielva.
	5 Man ná ye *orture i mar qui lá ye save i Yésus ná i Eruion? 6 Si ná ye túle nennen ar sercenen, Yésus Hristo, lá i nennen erinqua, mal i nennen ar i sercenen. Ar i faire ná ya *vettea, pan i faire nanwie ná. 7 An ear nelde yar *vettar, 8 i faire ar i nén ar i serce, ar nelde sine nar er. 
9 Qui camilve i *vettie Atanion, Eruo *vettie ambe túra ná. An si ná i *vettie Eruo, i *evetties pa Yondorya. 10 Ye save mí Eruion harya i *vettie immosse. Ye ua save Erusse acárie se *hurindo, pan uas asávie i *vettie ya sé ánie pa Yondorya. 11 Ar si ná i *vettie, i Eru antane ven oira coivie, ar coivie sina ea Yondoryasse. 12 Ye same i Yondo same i coivie; ye ua same i Eruion ua same i coivie.
13 Tecin lenna nati sine i istuvalde i samilde oira coivie, lé i savir mí esse i Eruiono. 14 Ar si ná i lérie quetiéva ya savilve senna, i qui arcalve *aiqua ve indómerya, hlaris ve. 15 Ente, qui istalve i hlaris ve pa *aiqua ya arcalve, istalve i samuvalve i arcainar, pan arcanielvet sello.   

CHAPTER 5 
Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, and everyone who loves the Father will love [the one] who was born by him. 2 By this we know that we love the children of God, when we are loving God and are doing his commandments. 3 For this is the love for God, that we abide by his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome, 4 since everything that is born of God conquers the world. And this is the victory that has conquered the world: our faith.
	5 Who is [he] who conquers the world if not [he] who believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 6 This is [he] who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not by the water alone, but by the water and by the blood. And the spirit is what is witnessing, since the spirit is truth. 7 For [there] are three that bear witness, 8 the spirit and the water and the blood, and these three are one.
	9 If we receive the witness of men, God’s witness is greater. For this is the witness of God, that he has witnessed about his Son. 10 [He] who believes in the Son of God possesses the witness within himself. [He] who does not believe in God has made him a liar, since he has not believed the witness that he has given about his Son. 11 And this is the witness, that God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. 12 [He] who has the Son has the life; [he] who does not have the Son of God does not have the life.
13 I write these things to you that you will know that you have eternal life, you who believe in the name of the Son of God. 14 And this is the freeness of speech that we have towards him, that if we ask for anything according to his will, he hears us. 15 Furthermore, if we know that he hears us about anything that we ask for, we know that we shall have the [things] asked for, since we have asked them from him.

16 Qui aiquen cene hánorya cára úcare ya ua tulya qualmenna, arcuvas, ar Eru antuva sen coivie – qui uas mici queni ion úcare tulya qualmenna. Eä úcare ya tulya qualmenna; uan quete i mo arcuva pa ta. 17 Ilya *şanyelórie úcare ná, ananta ea úcare ya ua tulya qualmenna.
18 Istalve i aiquen nóna Eruo ua úcare, mal i Quén ye náne nóna Eruo himya se, ar i Olca ua appa se.
19 Istalve i nalve Eruo, mal i quanda mar caita i túresse i Olco. 
20 Ar istalve i utúlie i Eruion, ar ánies ven hande istien sé ye şanda ná, ar ealve yesse şanda ná, Yondorya Yésus Hristonen. Sé ná i nanwa Aino ar oira coivie. 21 Hinyar, *hepa inde cordonillon!

16 If anybody sees his brother do [or, commit] a sin that does not lead to death, he shall make request, and God will give him life – if he is not among the people whose sin leads to death. [There] is a sin that leads to death; I do not say that one is to make request concerning that. 17 All lawlessness is sin, and yet there is sin that does not lead to death.
18 We know that anyone born of God does not sin, but the One who was born of God abides by him, and the Wicked One does not touch him.
19 We know that we are of God, but the whole world lies in the power of the Wicked One.
20 And we know that the Son of God has come, and he has given us understanding to know him who is true, and we are in [him] who is true, by his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life. 21 My children, keep yourselves from idols!
