I Minya Tecetta Timoşeonna

The First Letter to Timothy

---

RANTA 1 
Paulo – Yesus Hristo apostel, ve cánina lo Eru *Rehtolva ar Hristo Yésus estelelva, 2 Timoşeonna, nanwa hína i saviesse: Nai euvar lisse, oravie, raine ho Eru i Atar ar Hristo Yésus Herulva.
	3 Ve hortanenye lye lemya Efesusse íre lelyumnen Maceronianna, sie carin sí, canielyan quenelin i ávalte peanta ettelea peantie 4 ar i ávalte cime nyarier ar ontaleparmar ú metto, yar tulyar minaşúriennar nó tulyalte i etsatienna *aiquava lo Eru i saviesse. 5 Canie sino met ná melme et poica endallo ar et mára *immotuntiello ar saviello ú *imnetyaleo. 6 Mal quérala inte sine natillon quelli anaier quérine cumna quetienna, 7 mérala náve *peantari şanyeo, mal loitalte hanya yúyo i nati pa yar quétalte ar tai pa yar carpalte verye quettalínen.

Paul – apostle of Jesus Christ, as commanded by God our Father and Christ Jesus our hope, 2 to Timotheus, true child in the faith: May [there] be grace, mercy, [and]  peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
	3 As I exhorted you to remain in Ephesus when I was to go to Macedonia, so I do now, for you to command some people that they are not to teach strange teaching 4 and that they are not to heed fables and genealogies without end, which lead to inquiries before [/rather than] they lead to a distribution of anything by God in the faith. 5 The aim of this charge [canie, commanding] is love out of a pure heart and out of a good conscience without hypocrisy. 6 But turning themselves from these things some have been turned to empty speaking [/idle talk], 7 wishing to be teachers of law, but failing to understand both the things of which they are speaking and the ones of which they talk with bold words.

	8 Istalve in i Şanye mára ná, qui mo *yuhta sa mi şanya lé, 9 arwa istya sino: Uas tare faila quenenna, mal queninnar *şanyelóre ar amortala, *ainolóre ar úcarindor, ú melmeo ar úairi, i nahtar atari ar amilli, atannahtari, 10 *hrupuhtari, neri i caitar as neri, *aumapandor, quenir i hurir ar racir vandaltar, ar ilya hyana nat ya tare i *málea peantienna 11 ve i alcarinqua evandilyon i valima Aino, ya náne panyaina hepienyasse.

	8 We know that the Law is good, if one uses it in a regular [or, 'lawful'] manner, 9 having this knowledge: It does not stand against a righteous person, but against people lawless and rebellious, godless and sinners, without love and unholy, that kill fathers and mothers, manslayers, 10 fornicators, men that lie [/sleep] with men, abductors [au-mapa-ndo-r "away-seize-r-s"], people who lie and break their promises, and every other thing that stands against the healthy teaching 11 according to the glorious gospel of the happy God, which was placed in my keeping.

	12 Hantan Hristo Yésun, ye antane nin antoryame, pan nontesen voronwa ar ni-sante núromolien, 13 ómu yá anen quén ye naiquente ar roitane ar náne naraca. Ananta camnen oravie, pan laistasse carnen sie, pénala savie. 14 Mal Herulvo lisse náne ita úvea, as savie ar melme mi Hristo Yésus.

	12 I thank Christ Jesus, who gave me strength [lit. strengthening], since he counted me faithful and reserved me for servant-work, 13 though formerly I was a person who blasphemed and persecuted and was violent. And yet I received mercy, since [it was] in ignorance I did so, lacking faith. 14 But our Lord's grace was extremely abundant, with faith and love in Christ Jesus.

	15 Quetie sina vórima ná, ar valda náveo aqua cámina: Hristo Yésus túle mir i mar rehtien úcarindor. Mici té inye i amminda ná. 16 Mal i casta yanen camnen oravie náne i inyenen ence Hristo Yésun tana quanda cólerya minyave, cárala ní *epemma ion savuvar sesse, sie ñetala oira coivie.
	17 Aranen oialeo, *alahastima, *alacénima, i erya Ainon, na laitie ar alcar tennoio ar oi! Násie.

	This saying is faithful, and worthy of being fully received: Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Among them I am the most prominent. 16 But the reason by which I received mercy was that by me it was possible for Christ Jesus to show his patience first, making me an example of [those] who will believe in him, thus getting eternal life.
	17 To the king of eternity, incorruptable, invisible, to the sole God, be honor and glory forever and ever! Amen.

	18 Ortírie sina panyan lyesse, Timoşeo hínanya, i apaceninen yar tulyaner lyenna; sie polil tainen mahta i mára mahtiesse, 19 arwa saviéno ar mára *immotuntieno, ya queneli ahátier oa, ar savielto cirya anaie nancarna. 20 Mici té nar Himenaio ar Alexander, ar ánien tu mir Sátano túre, pariettan paimestanen i ávatte naiquete.

	18 This overseership I put on you, Timothy my child, by the predictions which led to you; thus you can by them fight in the good fight, 19 having faith and a good conscience, which some have thrown away, and the ship of their faith has been destroyed. 20 Among them are Hymenaeus and Alexander, and I have given them [dual] into Satan's power, for them [dual] to learn by chastisement that they [dual] are not to blaspheme.

RANTA 2
Etta, minyave, hortan i carilde arcandi, hyamier, *mánacestier, hantaler, pa ilye atani, 2 pa arani ar illi i ear mi minde meni, samielvan coivie ya ná quilda ar rainesse, mi ilya *ainocimie ar *sanwelungie. 3 Ta ná mára ar *maicámima Eru *Rehtolvan, 4 ye mere i ilye atani nauvar rehtaine ar tuluvar istyanna i nanwiéno. 5 An ea Eru er, ar er enelmo imbi Eru ar atani, Hristo Yésus i atan, 6 ye antanexe ve *nanwere illin: Pa ta mauya *vetta mi lúmi yar samilve. 7 Tana mehten anen sátina *nyardar ar apostel – nyarin i nanwie, uan húra – *peantar nórion, mi savie ar nanwie.

Therefore, firstly, I exhort that you make petitions, prayers, intercessions [mánacestier, "boon-seekings"], thanksgivings, concerning all men, 2 concerning kings and all that are in prominent places, for them to have a life which is quiet and in peace, in all reverence and seriousness. 3 That is good and acceptable [well-receivable] to God our Savior, 4 who wishes that all men will be saved and will come to knowledge of the truth. 5 For there is one God, and one intermediary between God and men, Christ Jesus the man, 6 who gave himself as a ransom for all: Of that it is necessary to witness in the times that we have. 7 For that purpose I was appointed a preacher and an apostle – I tell the truth, I do not lie – teacher of nations, in faith and truth.

	8 Etta merin i mi ilya nóme atani hyamuvar, ortala sarte mát, quérala inte rúşello ar costiellon. 9 Mi imya lé merin i netyuvar i nissi inte *maipartaine larmainen, mi nucumna lé ar arwe máleo sámo, lá *partala findilelta, hya maltanen hya marillainen hya mirwa larmanen, 10 mal mi lé valda nission i quetir pa inte i nalte *ainocimye – ta ná, máre cardainen.
	11 Nís paruva quildesse, aqua panyala inse nu hére. 12 Uan lave i nís peanta, hya same hére or nér; nís nauva quilda. 13 An Atan náne ontaina minyave, tá Éve. 14 Ente, Atan úne úşahtaina, mal i nís náne úşahtaina ar lantane mir şanyeracie. 15 Mal nauvas rehtaina coliénen híni, qui lemyalte mi savie ar melme ar airitie, as mále sámo.

	8 Therefore I wish that in every place men will pray, raising faithful hands, turning themselves from wrath and quarrelings. 9 In the same manner I wish that the women will adorn themselves with well-arranged garments, in a humble manner and having soundness [mále, good health] of mind, not arranging their hair, or with gold or with pearls or with costly garment, 10 but in the manner worthy of women that say about themselves that they are reverential, that is, by good deeds. 
	11 A woman is to learn in quiet, fully submitting herself to [lit. putting herself under] authority. 12 I do not allow that a woman teaches, or has authority over a man; a woman will be silent. 13 For Adam [Atan = generic Man] was created first, then Eve. 14 Furthermore, Adam was not seduced, but the woman was seduced and fell into law-breaking. 15 But she will be saved by bearing children, if they remain in faith and love and sanctification, with soundness of mind.

RANTA 3
Vórima i quetta: Qui aiquen mere ortírie, meris mára molie. 2 Etta mauya i nauva ortirindo napsa pella, erya verio veru, nalda haimassen, arwa máleo sámo, *partaina, nilda etteleain, istala peanta, 3 lá antaina limpen, lá palpala, mal moica, lá *tyelpendil, 4 nér tulyala véra nosserya, arwa *canwacimye hínion ilya *sanwelungiesse 5 (qui quén ua ista tulya véra nosserya, manen ortiruvas Eruo ocombe?), 6 lá quén *vinquerna, hya cé nauvas *valatea ar lantuva mir i imya námie ve i Arauco. 7 Ente, mauya i samis mára *vettie quenillon i ettesse, pustien se lantiello mir *tulcarpie ar i Arauco remma.

Faithful [is] the word: If anyone desires an office of overseer, he desires a good work. 2 Therefore it is necessary that an overseer will be beyond suspicion, husband of a single wife, lowly [moderate] in his habits, having soundness of mind, arranged [/organized], friendly to strangers, knowing [how to] instruct, 3 not given to wine, not beating, but gentle, not a money-lover, 4 a man leading his own family, having reverent childer with every seriousness 5 (if a person does not know [how to] lead his own family, how will he oversee God's congregation?), 6 not a person newly-turned [/newly converted], or maybe he will become proud and will fall under the same judgement as the Devil. 7 Therefore, it is necessary that he has a good witness from people on the outside, to stop him from falling into rebuke and the Devil's snare.

	8 Mi imya lé, mauya i nauva *ocombenduri *sanwelunge, lá quetila lamba attanen, lá antala inte olya limpen, lá milcave cestala úfaila ñetie, 9 arwe i fóleo i saviéno poica *immotuntiénen. 10 Nai té nauvar tyastaine minyave; epeta lava tien náve núror, nála napsa pella.
	11 Nai nissi mi imya lé nauvar *sanwelunge, lá quétala ulco pa exeli, nalda haimassen, voronwe ilye natissen. 
	12 Nai *ocombenduri nauvar veruvi erya nisso, tulyala vére nosseltar mai. 13 An neri i molir mai ve *ocombenduri ñetir mára tarie ar túra lérie quetiéva pa Hristo Yésus.

	8 In the same manner it is necessary that congregation-servants will be serious, not speaking with two tongues, not giving themselves to much wine, not greedily seeking unjust gain, 9 having the mystery of the faith with a pure conscience. 10 May they be [or, let them be] tested first; thereafter let them be servants, being beyond suspicion.
	11 May women in the same manner be serious, not speaking evil about others, lowly in habits, faithful in all things.
	12 May congregation-servants be husbands of a single wife, leading their own families well. 13 For men that serve well as congregation-servants receive a good standing and great freedom of speech as concerns Christ Jesus.

	14 Tecin lyen nati sine, ómu samin estel i tuluvan lyenna rato. 15 Mal qui nauvan hampa, istuval manen mauya lyen lenga Eruo coasse, ya ná i coirea Eruo ocombe, i nanwiéno tarma ar tulco. 16 É i fóle *ainocimiéva ná hoa: Anes apantaina i hrávesse, quétina faila i fairesse, tannexe valalin, náne *nyardaina i nóressen, sávina i mardesse, cámina ama alcaresse.

	14 I write to you these things, though I have hope that I will come to you soon. 15 But if I am hindered, you will know how it is necessary for you to behave in God's house, which is the congregation of the living God, pillar and support of the truth. 16 Indeed the secret of reverence is great: He was revealed in the flesh, pronounced righteous in the spirit, showed himself to angels, was preached in the nations, believed in the world, received up in glory.

RANTA 4
Mal i Faire quete tére quettalínen i mí métime lúmi queneli lantuvar oa i saviello, címala faireli i tyarir exi ranya, ar i peantier raucoron, 2 i *imnatyalénen quenion i quetir huruvi, arwe tehto véra *immotuntieltasse ve qui carna lauca anganen. 3 Váquetilte i mo verya ar canir i mo quere oa mastimar yar Eru ontane náven cámine hantalénen lo i samir savie ar istya i nanwiéno. 4 An ilya onna Eruo mára ná, ar ua ea maure quere oa *aiqua qui nas cámina hantalénen, 5 an nás airinta Eruo quettanen ar hyamiénen.

CHAPTER 4
But the spirit says in straight words that in last times some will fall away from the faith, heeding spirits that cause others to stray, and the teachings of demons, 2 by the hypocrisy of people that speak lies, having a mark on their own conscience as if made by a hot iron. 3 They forbid that one marries and command that one turns away edibles that God created to be received with thanks by [the ones] that have faith and knowledge of the truth. 4 For every creature of God is good, and there is no need to turn away anything if it is received with thanksgiving, 5 for it is hallowed by God's word and by prayer.

	6 Antala canwar sine i hánoin nauval Hristo Yésuo mára núro, ye ale i quettainen i saviéno ar i mára peantiéno ya ihíliel. 7 Mal quera oa i úairi nyarier yáre nission. Ono á cesta náve finwa *ainocimiesse! 8 An carie i hroa finwa ná aşea nótime natalin, mal *ainocimie ná aşea ilye natin, pan samis vanda coivie sinan ar i túlala coivien véla. 9 Vórima ar valda náveo aqua cámina tana quetie ná! 10 An met sinan molilve ar mótalve, pan apánielve estelelva coirea Ainosse, ye ná *Rehto ilye atanion, i vorondaron or illi.

	6 Giving these orders to the brothers you will be Christ Jesus's good servant, who thrives on the words of faith and of the good teaching which you have followed. 7 But turn away the unholy fables of old women. But seek to be skilled in reverence! 8 For making the body skilled is beneficial for a few things, but reverence is beneficial for all things, since it has a promise for this life for and the coming life alike. 9 Faithful and worthy of being fully received is that saying! 10 For for this purpose we labour and toil, since we have put our hope in a living God, who is a Savior of all men, of the faithful ones above all.

	11 Cana tien sie, ar á peanta! 12 Áva lave aiquenen nattire néşelya. Úsie, na *epemma i vorondain quetiesse, lengiesse, melmesse, saviesse, poiciesse. 13 Tenna tuluvan, cima i hentie, i tiutie, i peantie. 14 Áva loita *yuhta i lisse ya ea lyesse, antaina lyen apacennen ar i amyáraron paniénen máltat lyesse. 15 Á sana pa nati sine, quata sámalya tainen; sie nauva aşcene illin manen lelyal ompa. 16 Hepa sámalya imlesse ar peantielyasse! Á lemya sine natissen, an sie cárala rehtal imle ar i lastar lyenna véla.

	11 Command them so, and teach! 12 Do not let anyone despise your youth. On the contrary, be an example for the faithful ones in speech, in behavior, in love, in faith, in purity. 13 Until I shall come, give heed to the reading, the comfort, the teaching. 14 Do not fail to use the grace that is in you, given you by a prediction [or, prophecy] and by the elder's putting their hands on you. 15 Think about these things, fill your mind with them; thus all will see how you go forward. 16 Keep your mind on yourself and on your teaching! Remain in these things, for so doing you save yourself and [those] that listen to you alike.

RANTA 5
Amyáranna áva quete narace quettainen. Úsie, cara arcande sen ve ataren, nesse nerin ve hánoin, yáre nissin ve amillin, nesse nissin ve néşain, ilya poiciesse.
	3 Á anta alcar *verulórain i nanwave nar *verulórar. 4 Mal qui ea *verulóra as ye ear hínali hya hínali hínaron, lava tien minyave pare lenga *ainocimiénen véra coaltasse ar anta vanima *nampaityale nostarultant, an ta ná mára Eruo hendusse. 5 Ono ye é *verulóra ná ar olólie úna, apánie estelya Erusse ar lemya arcandessen ar hyamiessen lómisse yo auresse. 6 Mal ye cesta maileryar ná qualina, ómu coitas. 7 Etta á anta canwar sine, pustien aiquen quetiello ulco pa te. 8 Mal qui aiquen ua anta véraryain – ar or illi tien i nar coaryasse – maureltar, alálies i savie ar ná faica lá quén ye ua save.

CHAPTER 5
Do not speak to an elderly man with harsh words. On the contrary, make an entreaty to him as to a father, to young men as to brothers, to old women as to mothers, to young women as to sisters, in all purity [or, chasteness].
	3 Honor [lit. give glory to] widows that truly are widows. 4 But if there is a widow with whom there are children or children's children, let them first learn to behave with godly reverence in their own house and give a proper recompensation to their parents [dual], for that is good in God's eyes. 5 But [a woman] who indeed is a widow and has become destitute, has put her hope in God and remains in petitions and prayers at night and at day. 6 But she who seeks her lusts is dead, though she lives. 7 Therefore give these orders, to stop anyone from speaking evil about them. 8 But if anyone does not give to his own – and above all to those that are in his house – their needs, he has denied the faith and is worse than a person who does not believe.

	9 Á panya *verulóra nís i témasse qui samis loar lá nu *enequean, veri erya veruo, 10 nís pa ye mo nyare pa máre cardaryar, qui ortanes híni, qui camnes ettelear, qui sóves i airion talu, qui manyanes roitainar, qui hilyanes ilya mára carda.

	9 Put a widowed woman on the list [téma] if she has years not under sixty [= if she is at least sixty years old], wife of a single husband, 10 a woman of whom one tells about her good deeds, if she raised children, if she received foreigners, if she washed the feet [dual] of the holy ones, if she helped [the] persecuted ones, if she followed every good deed.

	11 Mal quera oa ambe nesse *verúlórar, an íre yérelta tuce te oa Hristollo, merilte verya 12 ar lantar nu námie pan hehtanelte minya voronwielta. 13 Mí imya lú yando parilte náve ú moliéno, vantala coallo coanna, lá eryave loitala mole, mal yando nyátala ar mittala inte mir exelion nattor, carpala pa nati pa yar ua ea maure carpa. 14 Etta merin i sine ambe nesse *verulórar veryuvar, ar i colilte híni ar mahtar mar; sie ye tare venna ua samuva casta quetien yaiwe. 15 Yando sí queneli anaier quérine hilien Sátan. 16 Qui ea *verulórali as sávala nís, mauya sen manya te, lá panyala cólo i ocombenna. Tá i ocombe pole manya i é nar *verulórar.

	11 But turn away younger widows, for when their sexual desire draws them away from Christ, they wish to marry 12 and fall under judgement since they abandoned their first steadfastness. 13 At the same time they also learn to be without labor, wandering from house to house, not only failing to labor, but also gossiping and inserting themselves into the affairs of others, talking about things of which there is no need to talk. 14 Therefore I wish that these younger widows are to marry, and that they bear children and manage a home; thus [one] who stands against us will not have a reason for speaking mockery. 15 Even now some are turned to follow Satan. 16 If there are some widows with a believing woman, it compels for her to help them, not putting a burden on the congregation. Then the congregation can help those that indeed are widows.

	17 Lava i amyárain i tarir epe i ocombe mi mára lé náve nótaine valde atwa laitiéno, or illi i mótar carpiesse ar peantiesse. 18 An i tehtele quete: Áva pusta mundo *etevattala ori, matiello," yando: "Ye mole ná valda *paityaleryo." 19 Áva note *ulquetie amyáranna ve nanwa, qui uat ea astarindor atta hya nelde. 20 Á naitya úcarindor íre illi tírar, tyarien yando i exi ruce. 21 *Vettan epe Eru ar Hristo Yésus ar i cíline vali: Á himya nati sine ú namiéno nóvo, cárala munta címala cendeler. 
	22 Áva panya mályat aiquende acca rongo; ente, áva same ranta i úcarissen exion; hepa imle poica.
	23 Áva ambe suce nén, mal á *yuhta pitya lesta limpeva, cumbalyan ar i hlívin yar rimbave perperil. 
	24 Atallion úcari nar aşceni, ar menir epe te námienna. Exelion úcari yando hilyar. 25 Mí imya lé yando i máre cardar nar aşceni, ar yar uar sie, nar en úfantime.

	17 Let the elders that stand before the congregation in a good manner, be counted worthy of double honor, above all the ones that toil in speaking and teaching. 18 For the scripture says: "Do not stop a bull trampling [threshing] out grain, from eating", also: "He who works is worthy of his reward." 19 Do not count an accusation against an elder as true, if there are not two or three witnesses. 20 Rebuke sinners while all are watching, to cause also the others to fear. 21 I witness before God and Jesus Christ and the chosen angels: Stick to these things without judging beforehand, doing nothing [while] heeding faces [= showing partiality]. 
	22 Do not put your hands on anyone too soon; furthermore, do not have a share in the sins of others; keep yourself pure. 
	23 Do not drink water [any]more, but use a small amount [lesta 'measure'] of wine, for your belly and for the illnesses that you frequently suffer.
	24 Some men's sins are easy to see, and go before them to judgement. The sins of some other ones also follow. 25 In the same manner the good deeds are easily seen, and [the ones] that are not so, are still impossible to hide.

RANTA 6
Pa illi i nar móli nu yanta: Á notir herultar valde ilya laitiéno, pustien aiquen quetiello yaiwe pa Eruo esse ar i peantie. 2 Ente, nai i samir sávala heruvi uar nattiruva te pan nalte hánor. Úsie, mauya tien náve arye núror, pan i nar manyaine mára molieltanen nar queni i savir ar nar melde.
	Á peanta nati sine ar á horta sie! 3 Qui aiquen peanta hyana peantie ar ua came i *málie quettar Yésus Hristo Herulvo hya i *ainocimya peantie, 4 samis palúna sáma, hanyala munta, mal nála hlaiwa pa maquetier ar costier pa quettar. Sine natillon tulir *hruceni, costi, yaiwi, olce napsar, 5 vórie mahtier mici neri hastaine sámaltassen, illon i nanwie anaie &pílina, pan sanalte pa *ainocimie ve tie ñetienna. 6 *Ainocimie é ná tie hoa ñetienna, as fáre. 7 An atálielve munta mir i mar; mi imya lé polilve cole munta et sallo. 8 Etta, qui samilve matta ar larmar, lava tain farya ven.

Concerning all that are servants under a yoke: Let them count their lords [/masters] worthy of every honor, to stop anyone from speaking mockery about God's name and the teaching. 2 Furthermore, may those that have believing husbands not despise them since they are brothers. On the contrary, it is necessary for them to be better servants, since the ones that are helped by their good labor are people that believe and are beloved.
	Teach these things and so urge! 3 If anyone teaches another teaching and does not receive [or, accept] the healthful words of Jesus Christ our lord or the reverent teaching, 4 he has a swollen mind, understanding nothing, but being sick about questions and quarrels about words. From these things come envies, disputes, mockeries, wicked suspicions, 5 continual fights among men corrupted in their minds, from whom the truth has been stolen, since they think about reverence as a path to gain. 6 Reverence is indeed a path to great gain, together with sufficiency [/what is needed]. 7 For we have brought nothing into the world; in the same manner we can carry nothing out of it. 8 Therefore, if we have food and clothes, let them suffice for us.

	9 Mal i merir náve láre lantar mir úşahtie ar remma ar rimbe úhande ar harnala íreli, yar tucir atani undu mir nancarie ar atalantie. 10 An i melme telpeva ná şundo ilye ulce nation, ar cestala melme sina queneli anaier tyárine ranya i saviello ar *etérier inte rimbe naicelínen. 
	11 Mal elye, Eruo atan, uşa ho nati sine! Mal á roita failie, *ainocimie, savie, melme, voronwie, moicie! 12 Á mahta i mára mahtie i saviéno, á mapa i oira coivie yanna anel yálina ar pa ya carnelye mára *etequenta epe rimbe astarmoli.

	9 But those who want to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many insensible and hurtful [harnala = 'wounding'] desires, which pull men down into undoing and downfall. 10 For the love of money is a root of all evil things, and seeking this love some have been caused to stray from the faith and have pierced themselves with many pains.
	11 But you, man of God, flee from these things! But pursue righteousness, reverence, love, steadfastness, gentleness! 12 Fight the good fight of faith, seize the eternal life to which you were called and of which you made a good confession before many witnesses.

	13 Epe Eru, ye anta coivie illin, ar epe Yésus Hristo, ye *vettane Pontio Piláton i mára *vettie, canin len: 14 Alde himya i axan mi ilvana lé pa ya *úquen pole quete ulco, tenna i apantie Yésus Hristo Herulvava. 15 Apantie sina i valima ar erya Meletya tanuva véra lúmeryasse, i Aran ion turir ve arani ar i Heru ion turir ve heruvi, 16 i erya Quén arwa ilfirin coiviéno, ye mare calasse yanna *úquen pole tule, ye *úquen mici atani ecénie hya pole cene. Sen na i laitie ar túre tennoio! Násie.

	13 Before God, who gives life to all, and before Jesus Christ, who witnessed to Pontius Pilate the good testimony, I command you: 14 Keep you [pl.] the commandment in a perfect manner of which nobody can speak evil, until the revelation of Jesus Christ our Lord. 15 This relevation the happy and sole Majesty will show in his proper time, the King of [those] who rule as kings and the Lord of [those] who rule as lords, 16 the sole Person having immortal life, who dwells in a light that no one can come to, whom no one aming men has seen or can see. To him be the honor and power forever! Amen.

	17 Cana in nar láre randa sinasse: Áva na turquime ar áva panya estel mi lar, ya ua tanca, mal mi Eru, ye anta ven lára lesta ilye nativa alasselvan. 18 Á molir márien, náveltan láre máre cardassen, valime antiesse, manwe satien ya samilte, 19 comyala inten mára talma i lúmen ya tuluva, mapien i anwa coivie.
	20 A Timoşeo, tira ya anaie antaina mir mandolya, ar quera imle oa i úairi ar cumne nyatiellon, ar i cotye quetiellon i "istyo" estaina sie hurunen. 21 An quétala i samilte taite  "istya", queneli equérier inte oa i saviello.
	Nai i Erulisse euva aselde!

	17 Command [those] who are rich in this age: Do not be haughty and do not put hope in riches, which are not steadfast, but in God, who gives us a rich measure of all things for our joy, 18 Let them labour for good, for them to be rich in good deeds, happy in giving, ready to distribute what they have, 19 gathering for themselves a good foundation for the time that shall come, in order to seize the real life.
	20 O Timothy, watch [that] which has been given into your custody, and turn yourself away from the unholy and empty chattings, and from the contrary [cotye, hostile] sayings of the "knowledge" called so falsely [hurunen, by a lie]. 21 For saying that they have such "knowledge", some have turned themselves away from the faith.
	May the grace of God be with you!
