I Attea Tecetta Şessaloniceannar 

The Second Letter to the Thessalonians

---

RANTA 1
Paulo ar Silváno ar Timoşeo i ocombenna Şessalonicasse, mi Eru Atarelva ar i Heru Yésus Hristo. 
	2 Nai samuvalde lisse ar raine ho Eru i Atar ar i Heru Yésus Hristo!
	3 Nalme naute illume anta Erun hantale pa lé, hánor, ve vanima ná; an savielda ála ita lintave, ar mici lé ilqueno melme i exiva oi ambe túra ná. 4 Etta elme laitar imme pa lé mici Eruo ocombi, castanen voronwieldo ar savieldo mi ilye roitieldar ar i şangier yar cólalde, 5 ettánala Eruo faila namie, náveldan nótine valde Eruo araniéno, yan é perpéralde.

CHAPTER 1
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy to the congregation in Thessalonica, in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
	2 May you have grace and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
	3 We are obliged to always give God thanks concerning you, brothers, as is proper; for your faith is growing extremely quickly, and among you everyone's love of the others is ever more great. 4 Therefore we praise ourselves concerning [= take pride in] you among God's congregations, by reason of your steadfastness and your faith in all your persecutions and the tribulations that you bear, 5 showing forth [et-tana-] God's just judgment, for you to be counted worthy of God's kingdom, for which you are indeed suffering.

	6 Sie ná faila Eruo hendusse *nampaitya şangie in tyarir şangie len, 7 mal elden i perperir şangie, sére aselme íre i Heru Yésus ná apantaina menello as túrie valiryar 8 mi uryala náre, íre talas nancarie innar uar ista Eru ar uar hilya Yésus Herulvo evandilyon. 9 Té perperuvar paime oira nancariéva oa i Herullo ar alcarinqua poldoreryallo, 10 i auresse ya tuluvas camien alcar mici airiryar ar náven tíraina elmendanen lo illi i sáver – an i *vettie ya antanelme náne sávina lo elde.
	11 Tana mehten é hyámalme len illume, arcala i Ainolva notuva le valde yalieryo ar telyuva ilqua ya meris – márie ar cardar saviéno – túresse, 12 talien alcar Yésus Herulvo essen mici le. 

	6 Thus it is just in God's eyes to pay back tribulation to those that cause tribulation to you, 7 but to you that suffer tribulation, rest with us when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his powerful angels 8 in a burning flame, when he brings destruction upon those that do not know God and do not follow the gospel of Jesus our Lord. 9 They will suffer [the] punishment of eternal undoing away from the Lord and from his glorious strength, 10 on the day that he shall come to receive glory among his holy ones and to be watched with wonder by all that believed –  for the witness that we gave was believed by yourselves. 
	11 For this goal we are indeed always praying for you, praying that our God will count you worthy of his calling and will complete everything that he wants – goodness and deeds of faith – in power, 12 in order to bring glory to Jesus our Lord's name among you. 

RANTA 2
Mal, hánor, pa Yésus Hristo Herulvo entulesse ar návelva comyaine senna, arcalme lello: 2 Áva na lintiénen páline handeldallo hya valtaine, faireo apantiénen hya quettanen hya tecettanen quétina tule mello, quétala in i Heruo aure utúlie.
	3 Lava *úquenen sie şahta le, pan uas tuluva nó i *oatarie utúlie minyave, ar i nér *şanyelóriéva nauva apantaina, yondo nancariéno. 4 Taris venna ar ortaxe or ilquen estaina aino hya yenna mo hyame; sie hamúvas Eruo cordasse, tánala inse ve aino. 5 Ma ualde enyale i lan engen aselde, nyarnen lenna nati sine?

But, brothers, concerning the return of your Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to him, we ask of you: 2 Do not be quickly shaken from your wits or stirred, by a spirit's revelation or by a word or by a letter said to come from us, saying that the Lord's day has come.
	3 Let no one so seduce you, since it will not come before the apostasy has come first, and the man of lawlessness will be revealed, the son of destruction [nancarie, undoing]. 4 He stands against us and elevates himself over everyone called god or to whom one prays; thus he will sit down in God's temple, showing [/presenting] himself as a god. 5 Do you not recall that while I was with you, I told you these things?

	6 Ar sí istalde ya hépa se hampa, náveryan apantaina véra lúmeryasse. 7 I fóle *şányelóriéva móla yando sí, mal eryave tenna ye sí tára sanna nauva mapaina oa. 8 Ar tá i *şányelóra quén nauva apantaina, ye i Heru Yésus nancaruva antoryo şúlenen, ar ye taluvas muntanna íre tulierya anaie carna sinwa – 9 sé yeo tulie ná tyárina Sátano moliénen, ilya taura cardanen ar tanwanen ar húrala tengwenen 10 ar ilya úfaila úşahtiénen i nancaruvainaiva, pan ualte camne i melme nanwiéva, náveltan rehtaine. 11 Etta Eru antane te olla túrea ranyan, savieltan i huru. 12 Sie illi mici te nauvar námine, pan ualte sáve i nanwie, mal sámer alasse úfailiesse.

	6 And now you know that [which] is keeping him restrained, for him to be revealed at his own time. 7 The secret of lawlessness is working now as well, but solely until [he] who is now standing against it will be taken away. 8 And then the lawless person will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will undo with the breath of his mouth, and whom he will bring to nothing when his coming has been made known 9  – he whose coming is caused by Satan's work, by every [kind of] mighty deed and sign and lying portent, 10 and every unjust temptation of the ones that will be destroyed [nancaruvaina + iva for pl. object genitive] , since they did not receive the love of truth, for them to be saved. 11 Therefore God gave them over to a powerful error [ranya, erratic wandering], for them to believe the lie. 12 Thus all among them will be judged, since they did not believe the truth, but had joy in unrighteousness.

	13 Mal elmen mauya anta Erun hantale pa lé, hánor mélaine lo i Heru, an Eru le-cilde i yestallo náveldan rehtaine, airitiénen faireva ar saviénen i nanwiesse 14 yanna yando le-yaldes i evandilyonnen ya talalme, samieldan i Heru Yésus Hristo alcar. 15 Etta, hánor, tara tance ar á himya i cámine peantier pa yar anelde peantaine – qui quettalmanen hya qui tecettalmanen. 16 Ente, nai Yésus Hristo immo ar Eru Atarelva, ye vi-méle ar antane ven oira tiutie ar mára estel Erulissenen, 17 tiuituva endalda ar caruva le tulce mi ilya mára carda ar quetta.

	13 But for us it is necessary give God thanks concerning you, brothers beloved by the Lord, for God chose you from the beginning for you to be saved, by sanctification of spirit and by faith in the truth 14 to which he also called you by the gospel that we bring, for you to have the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. 15 Therefore, brothers, stand firm and abide by the received instructions of which you were instructed – whether by our word or whether by our letter. 16 Furthermore, may Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and gave us eternal comfort and good hope by grace, 17 comfort your heart and make you firm in every good deed and word.

RANTA 3
Teldave, hánor, hyama rámen; sie i Heruo quetta levuva lintiénen ar camuva alcar, ve cáras ara lé. 2 Yando hyama i nauvalme etelehtaine ulce ar olce atanillon, an illi uar same savie. 3 Mal i Heru voronwa ná, ar le-caruvas tance ar le-varyuva i Ulcallo. 4 Ente, nalme tance i Herusse pa le, i  cáralde ar en caruvar yar canilme. 5 Nai i Heru tulyulva endalda mir Eruo melme ar i Hristo voronwie.  

Finally, brothers, pray on our behalf; thus the Lord's word will still move quickly and will receive glory, as it is doing beside you. 2 Also pray that you will be delivered from evil and wicked men, for all do not have faith. 3 But the Lord is faithful, and he will make you firm and will protect you from the Evil One. 4 Furthermore, we are certain in the Lord concerning you, that you are doing and still will do [the things] that we command. 5 But the Lord will lead your heart into God's love and the endurance of the Christ. 

	6 Sí cánalme len, hánor, Yésus Hristo Herulvo essenen: Hepa inde oa ilya hánollo ye vanta mi úvanima lé ar lá i situnen ya camnelde mello. 7 An elde istar manen mauya len hilya tielmasse,  pan ualme lengane imíca te mi úvanima lé, 8 hya manter aiqueno matta lá paityala. Úsie, moliénen ar mótiénen, lómisse yo auresse, mólelme lá panien cólo aiquenna mici lé. 9 Lá peniénen túre, mal carien imme *epemma len, carnelme sie – carieldan ve elme carner. 10 An íre anelme aselde, antanelme len canwa sina: "Qui aiquen ua mere mole, yando uas matuva." 11 An hláralme i queneli mici le vantar mi úvanima lé, loitala mole, mal mittala inte mir i nattor exelion. 12 Taiti quenin antalme sina canwa ar hortale i Heru Yésus Hristonen: Á matir véra mastalta moliénen quildesse.

	6 Now I am commanding you, brothers, by the name of the our Lord Jesus Christ: Keep yourselves away from every brother who walks in an improper manner and not by the custom that you received from us. 7 For you know how it is necessary for you to follow in our path, by doing as we did, since we did not behave among you in an improper manner, 8 or ate anyone's food not paying. On the contrary, by work and by toil, at night and at day, we labored not to put [any] burden on anyone among you. 9 Not by [/for] lacking power, but to make ourselves an example to you, we did so – for you to do as we did. 10 For when we were with you, we gave you this command:   ”If anyone does not wish to work, he also will not eat.” 11 For we are hearing that some among you walk in an improper manner, failing to work, but inserting themselves into the matters of others. 12 To such people we give this command and exhortation by the Lord Jesus Christ: They are to eat their own bread by laboring in silence.  

	13 Mal elde, hánor, áva ole lumbe, pustala care ya vanima ná! 14 Mal qui aiquen ua lasta quettalmanna ter tecetta sina, *rena man náse. Á pusta náve óse, náveryan nucumna. 15 Ono áva note se ve ñotto, mal ora sen ve háno.
	16 Nai i Heru raineva immo antuva len raine illume, mi ilya lé. Nai i Heru euva aselde!
	17 Si ná *suilienya véra mányanen, ya ná tanwa mi ilya tecetta: Sie tecin.
	18 Nai Herulva Yésus Hristo lisse euva as illi mici le!

	13 But you, brothers, do not become tired, ceasing to do what is right! 14 But if anyone does not listen to our word through this letter, remember who he is. Stop being [or, associating] with him, for him to be humiliated. 15 But do not count him as an enemy, but warn him as a brother.
	16 May the Lord of peace himself give you peace always, in every manner. May the Lord be with you!
	17 This is my greeting by my own hand, which is a sign in every letter: So I write.
	18 May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all among you!

