I Attea Tecetta Timoşeonna

The Second Letter to Timothy

---

RANTA 1
Paulo – Yesus Hristo apostel Eruo indómenen, i vandanen pa i coivie ya ea Hristo Yésusse – 2 Timoşeonna, melda hína: Lisse, oravie ar raine ho Eru i Atar ar Hristo Yésus Herulva.
	3 Antan hantale Erun, yen nanye núro ve náner atarinyar, arwa poica *immotuntiéno, pan uan oi hauta le-enyale arcandenyassen, lómisse yo auresse, 4 milyala cene lye, íre enyalin nírelyar, návenyan quátina alassenen. 5 An enyalin i savie ya ea lyesse ú *imnetyaleo, ar ya marne minyave Lois &harunilyasse ar Eunice amillelyasse, mal nanye tanca i eas yando lyesse.

CHAPTER 1
Paul – apostle of Jesus Christ by God's will, by the promise about the life which is in Jesus Christ – 2 to Timothy [Timoşeo], beloved child: Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 
	3 I give thanks to God, to whom I am a servant as were my fathers, having a clean conscience, since I do not ever stop recalling you in my prayers [/petitions], night and day, 4 longing to see you, when I recall your tears, for me to be filled with joy. 5 For I recall the faith that is in you without hypocricy, and which dwelt first in Lois your grandmother and Eunice your mother, but I am sure that it exists also in you.

	6 Sina castanen *rentan lye entinta ve náre Eruo anna ya ea lyesse, pan panyanen mányat to lye. 7 An Eru ua ánie ven caurea faire, mal faire túreva ar melmeva ar máleva sámo. 8 Etta áva na naityana pa i *vettie Herulvo, hya pa ni ve nútinarya, mal sama masselya perperiéva i evandilyonen, Eruo túrenen. 9 Sé vi-rehtane ar vi-yalde aire yaliénen, lá castanen cardanyaron, mal castanen véra &mehtyo ar lisseryo, antaina ven Yésus Hristonen nó oialie lúmeli, 10 mal sí anaies carna sinwa íre *Rehtolva, Yésus Hristo, náne apantaina. Sé emétie qualme ar acaltie cala coivienna ar alahastienna i evandilyonnen, 11 pa ya inye anaie sátina ve tercáno ar apostel ar *peantar. 

	6 For this reason I remind you to rekindle like a fire God's gift which is in you, since I put my hands upon you. 7 For God has not given us a timid spirit, but a spirit of power and love and of health of mind. 8 Therefore do not be ashamed about the witness of our Lord, or concerning me as his bound one, but have your share in suffering for the gospel, by God's power. 9 He saved us and called us by a holy calling, not by reason of our deeds, but by reason of his own purpose [met, meht- 'aim'] and his grace, given us by Jesus Christ before everlasting times, 10 but now it has been made known when our Savior, Jesus Christ, was revealed. He has put an end to death and has shone a light upon life and upon incorruption by the gospel, 11 concerning which I have been set aside as a herald and an apostle and a teacher.

	12 Sina castanen perperin yando nati sine, mal uan naityana. An istan i quén yesse asávien, ar nanye tanca i polis tire ya ná panyaina mandonyasse tenna enta Aure. 13 Na tulyaina lo i quettar máleva ya ahláriel nillo, i saviénen ar melmenen Hristo Yésusse. 14 I mána panyaina mandolyasse tira i aire fairenen ya mare vesse. 
	15 Ve istal, ilye i queni Asiallo ni-ehehtier. Mici té nar Fihello ar Hermohenes. 16 Nai i Heru oravuva Onesifóro nossesse, an rimbave talles ninna ceutie, ar únes naityana pa naxenyar. 17 Úsie, íre túles Rómanna, ni-cestanes ú séreo ar hirne ni. 18 Nai i Heru lavuva sen hire oravie as i Héru enta auresse. Ar ilye i núrocardar yar carnes Efesosse istal mai. 

	12 For this reason I suffer also these things, but I am not ashamed. For I know the one in whom you have believed, and I am sure that he can guard what is put in my custody until that Day. 13 Be led by the healthy words [lit. words of health] that you have heard from me, by the faith and love in Jesus Christ. 14 Watch the good thing put in your custody, by the holy spirit that dwells in you.
	15 As you know, all the people from Asia have forsaken me. Among them are Phygellus and Hermogenes. 16 May the Lord have mercy on Onesiphorus's house, for frequently he brought me refreshment, and he was not ashamed about my bonds. 17 On the contrary, when he came to Rome, he sought me without rest and found me. 18 May the Lord let him to find mercy with the Lord on that day. And all the acts of service [núrocardar, servant-deeds] that he did in Ephesus you know well.

RANTA 2
Etta alye na turyaina, hinya, i lissenen ya ea Hristo Yésunen. 2 Ar i nati yar hlassel nillo ter rimbe *vettoli, á anta tai voronde atanin, in yando ecuva peanta exin. 3 Ve mára ohtar Hristo Yésuo perpera ulco as i exi. 4 *Úquen ye ná ohtar lave inse náve rembina i mancalenen coiviéva. Sie ece sen fasta ye carne se ohtar. 5 Ente, qui aiquen nore noriesse, uas came ríe qui uas nore ve i şanyer. 6 Ve mauya, i mólala *cemendur ná i minya ye came ranta i yávion. 7 Quata sámalya quetienyainen, an i Heru antuva lyen tercen pa ilye nati. 8 Enyala Yésus Hristo, ortaina qualinallon, Laviro erdeo, ve carna sinwa mi evandilinya, 9 i evandilyon yan perpéran ar cólan naxeli ve *ulcarindo. Mal Eruo quetta ua naxessen. 10 Etta nanye voronda ilquasse márien i cílinaron, mérala i yando té camuvar i rehtie ya ea Hristo Yésusse, as oira alcar. 11 Voronda i quetta: Qui quallelve óse, yando coituvalve óse; 12 qui nalve voronde, yando turuvalve óse: qui lalalves, sé yando laluva vé, 13 qui ualve voronde, sé en voronda ná, an uas pole lala inse.

CHAPTER 2
Therefore you be strengthened, my child, by the grace that is by Christ Jesus. 2 And the things that you heard from me through many witnesses, give them to faithful men, for whom it will also be possible to instruct others. 3 As a good soldier of Christ Jesus suffer evil with the others. 4 No one who is a soldier allows himself to be entangled by the commerce of life. Thus he can please the one who made him a soldier. 5 Furthermore, if anyone runs in a race, he does not receive a crown if he does not run according to the rules. 6 As is necessary, the working farmer is the first who receives a part of the fruits. 7 Fill your mind with my sayings, for the Lord will give you insight concerning all things. 8 Recall Jesus Christ, raised from [the] dead, of the seed of David, as made known in my gospel, 9 the gospel for which I am suffering and am carrying bonds as an evil-doer. But God's word is not in bonds. 10 Therefore I am steadfast in everything for the good of the chosen ones, wishing that also they will receive the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. 11 Faithful the word: If we died with him, we will also live with him; 12 if we are faithful, we will also rule with him; if he deny him, he will also deny us; 13 if we are not faithful, he is still faithful, for he cannot deny himself.

	14 Áte tyare enyale ta, ar cana tien epe i Heru: Áva costa pa quettar, an ta ua aşea, ar nancare i lastar. 15 Cara ilqua panien imle epe Eru ve tyastaina quén ye mole ú náveo naityana, mahtala i macil nanwiéva mi finwa lé. 16 Mal quera imle oa cumne ar úairi quetiellon, an tulyuvalte mir oi ambe tumna *ainolórie, 17 ar quettalta vintuva ve quelexie hrávesse. Himenaio ar Fileto nát mici te. 18 Queni sine equérier inte i nanwiello, quétala in i enortie amartie yando sí, ar carilte quenelion savie iltanca. 19 Ananta Eruo tulca talma en tare, arwa *lihta sino:  “I Héru ista véraryar”, ar:  “Mauya ilquenen ye esta i Héruo esse hehta úfailie!”

	14 Make them recall that, and command them before the Lord: Do not quarrel about words, for that is not beneficial, and destroyes [those] who listen. 15 Do everything to put yourself before God as a tested [and approved] person who works without being ashamed, handling the sword of truth in a skillful manner. 16 But turn yourself away from empty and unholy sayings, for they lead into ever deeper godlessness, 17 and their word will spread like rot in flesh. Hymenaeus and Philetus are among them. 18 These people have turned themselves from the truth, saying that the resurrection has happened even now, and they make some peoples' faith unsteady. 19 And yet God's firm foundation still stands, having this seal:  “The Lord knows his own”, and: “It is necessary for everyone that names the Lord's name to abandon unrighteousness!”

	20 Hoa coasse ear veneli lá rie maltava ar telpeva, mal yando toava ar cemne, ar veneli alcarinqua mehten, mal exeli mehten ú alcaro. 21 Etta, qui aiquen poita inse ho tai, nauvas vene alcarinqua mehten, airinta, *yuhtima yen same sa, manwaina ilya mára cardan. 22 Etta, uşa i nessime írellon, mal á roita failie, savie, melme, raine, as i yalir i Herunna et poica endallo.
	23 Mal quera oa *auce ar *istyalóre minaşurier, istala i tulyalte costiennar. 24 Ono mauya in i Heruo mól ua costa, mal i náse moica illin, istala peanta, avaleryala inse íre perperis ulco, 25 moicave peantala i cotyain, an cé Eru antauva tien inwis, tulyala istyanna i nanwiéva, 26 ar entuluvalte laiceltanna et i Arauco remmallo, té i náner mapaine lo sé carien nírarya.

	20 In a big house there are vessels not only of gold and silver, but also of wood or earthenware, and some vessels for a glorious purpose, but others for a purpose without glory. 21 Therefore, if anyone purifies himself from them, he will be a vessel for a glorious purpose, hallowed, useful for [the one] who has it, prepared for every good deed. 22 Therefore, flee from the youthful desires, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, with [the ones] that call to the Lord out of a pure heart. 
	23 But turn away foolish and ignorant inquries, knowing that they lead to quarrelings. 24 But it is necessary that the Lord's slave does not quarrel, but that he is gentle to all, knowing [how] to instruct, restraining himself when he suffers evil, 25 gently instructing the hostile ones, for perhaps God will give them a change of mind, leading to knowledge of the truth, 26 and they will return to their keenness of perception out of the Devil's snare, they that were seized by him in order to do his will. 

RANTA 3
Mal á ista si: I métime auressen hrange lúmeli tuluvar. 2 An atani meluvar inte ar meluvar telpe, laitala inte – turquime, naiquetila, lá cimila ontaru, ú hantaleo, úsarte, 3 ú melmeo nosseltava, lemyala mi cos, quetila ulco pa exi, lá polila ture inte, verce, ú melmeo máriéva, 4 *vartandoli, *nirmunque, *valatie, melila maileltar or Eru, 5 arwe canto *ainocimiéva mal váquetila túrerya; ar taiti quenillon quera imle oa. 6 An ho té ortar i fincave tulir mir coar ar rembar nípe nissi i colir cólo úcariva, tulyaine lo *alavéle íreli. 7 Illume páralte, mal ualte oi pole tule istyanna i nanwiéno. 

CHAPTER 3
But know this: In the last days difficult times will come. 2 For men will love themselves and will love money [/silver], praising themselved – haughty, blaspheming, not heeding parents, thankless, disloyal, 3 without love for [-va] their kin, remaining in strife, speaking evil about others, not able to control themselves, wild, without love of good, 4 betrayers, willful, proud, loving their lusts over God, 5 having a form of reverence but denying its power; and from such people turn yourself away. 6 For from them arise [the ones] that cleverly enter into houses and snare frail women that carry a burden of sin, led by various desires. 7 They are always learning, but they are not able to ever come to knowledge of the truth. 

	8 Tambe Yannes yo Yambres tarnet Mósenna, síve yando neri sine tarir i nanwienna, atalli aqua hastaine sámaltassen, quérine oa pa i savie. 9 Mal ualte tuluva ambe andave, an *sámalórielta nauva tanaina illin, ve yando náne *sámalórietta. 10 Ono elye ihílie peantienya, tienya coiviesse, mehtinya, savienya, cólenya, melmenya, voronwenya, 11 roitienyar, perperienyar – ve tai yar martaner nin mi Antiocía, mi Iconium, mi Listra – ar et ilyallon i Heru etelehtie ni. 12 É illi i merir same *ainocimya coivie mi Hristo Yésus nauvar roitaine. 13 Mal olce atani ar *hurumor menuvar mir oi ambe tumna ulco, tyarila exi ranya ar tyáraine ranya.

	8 As Jannes and Jambres stood against Moses, so also these men stand against the truth, men [atan-li > atalli] completely corrupted in their minds, rejected [lit. turned away] concerning the faith. 9 But they will not come any longer [or, further], for their madness [sámalórie, mindlessness] will be shown [/displayed, made evident] to all, as also was their [dual] madness [i.e., that of Jannes and Jambres]. 10 But you have followed my instruction, my path in life, my aim, my faith, my patience, my steadfastness, 11 my persecutions, my sufferings – like those that happened to me in Antioch, in Iconum, in Lystra – and out of [them] all the Lord has delivered me. 12 Indeed all that wish to have a reverent life in Christ Jesus shall be persecuted. 13 But wicked men and impostors will go into ever deeper evil, causing others to stray and [themselves being] caused to stray. 

	14 Mal elye, á lemya mí nati yar parnel ar yassen tancave savil, istala i queni illon parnel tai, 15 ar i ho anel hína sintel i airi tehteler, yar polir care lye saila rehtielyan, i saviénen ya Hristo Yésunen ná. 16 Ilye tehteler şúyaine lo Eru nar yando aşie peantien, querien oa loitie, carien nattor tére, paimestan failiesse. 17 Sie ece Eruo atanen náve aqua polila, nála manwaina ilya mára cardan.

	14 But you, remain in the things that you learned and in which you firmly believe, knowing the people from whom you learned them, 15 and that from you were a child you knew the holy scriptures, that can make you righteous for your salvation, by the faith which is by Christ Jesus. 16 All scriptures breathed [or, inspired] by God are also beneficial for instruction, for refuting [lit. turning away] error, for making matters straight, for chastisement in righteousness. 17 Thus it is possible for God's man to be wholly able, being prepared for every good deed.

RANTA 4
Panyan lyesse i canwa epe Eru ar Hristo Yésus, ye namuva i coirear ar i qualinar, ar ilceryanen ar aranieryanen: 2 Á cara sinwa i quetta, tara manwa máre lúmissen ar lúmissen yar uar máre, quera oa loitie, queta narace quettar, queta hortale, arwa ilya cóleo peantielyasse. 3 An tuluva lúme yasse ualte lavuva i aşea peantie, mal vére íreltainen comyuvalte *peantari i cityar hlarultat, 4 ar i nanwiello querulvaltexer oa, mal ranyuvalte, hilyala hurila nyarnar. 5 Mal elye, hepa laicelda ilye natissen, perpera ulco, mola ve quén carila sinwa i evandilyon, á telya núromolielya. 

CHAPTER 4
I put upon you the order before God and Christ Jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and by his apparance and by his kingdom: 2 Make known the word, stand ready in good times and in times that are not good, turn away error, speak stern [narace, harsh] words, speak encouragement [hortale, urging], having every patience in your teaching. 3 For [there] will come a time where they will not tolerate the beneficial teaching, but by their own desires they will gather teachers that tickle their ears, 4 and from the truth they will turn themselves away, but they will stray, following lying stories. 5 But you, keep your keenness of perception in all things, suffer evil, labour as a person making known the gospel, complete your service [lit. servant-labour].

	6 An inye ná yando sí *etulyaina ve *sucieyanca, ar i lúme yasse nauvan leryaina hare ná. 7 I mára mahtie amahtien, onórien i norie i mettanna, ehépien i savie. 8 Ho sí i ríe failiéva ná nin sátina, ta ya i Heru antauva nin enta auresse, mal lá inyen erinqua, mal yando illin i emélier i apantie seva. 
	9 Cara ilqua ya polil tulien ninna rongo! 10 An Lémas ehehtie ni, pan méles Arda sina, ar oantes Şessalonicanna, Hrescens Alatianna, Títo Lalmatianna. 11 Rie Lúcas lemya óni. 12 Á tala Marco ar áse care tule aselye, an náse aşea nin mi núromolienya. 12 Mal Tihico ementien Efesonna. 13 Íre tulil, á tala i colla ya hehtanen Troasse as Carpo, ar i parmar, or ilqua i helmaparmar.

	6 For I am also now poured forth as a drink-offering, and the time when I shall be freed is near. 7 The good fight I have fought, I have run the race to the end, I have kept the faith. 8 From now the wreath of righteousnes is reserved for me, that which the Lord shall give to me on that day, but not to me alone, but also all that have loved the revelation of him.
	9 Do everything that you can to come to me soon! 10 For Demas has forsaken me, since he loved this world, and he went away to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. 11 Only Luke [Lucas] remains with me. 12 Bring Mark and make him come with you, for he is helpful for me in my service [núro-molie, servant-work]. 12 But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus [Efeso]. 13 When I you come, bring the cloak that I left behind in Troas with Carpus, and the books, above everything the parchments [helmaparmar, skin-books].

	14 Alexander i *urustan carne rimbe ulculi nin – i Heru *nampaityuva se ve cardaryar nar – 15 ar yando elye tira imle pa sé, an tarnes quettalmannar mi ita cotya lé.
	16 Íre veryanen imne mí minya lú, *úquen manyane ni, mal ni-hehtanelte – nai ta ua nauva nótina téna – 17 ono i Heru tarne óni ar turyane ni, mérala in inyenen i *nyardie nauva telyaina ar  in ilye i nóri hlaruvar sa; ar anen etelehtaina i rauro antollo. 18 I Heru ni-etelehtuva ilya olca cardallo ar rehtuva ni meneldea aranieryan. Sen na i alcar tennoio ar oi. Násie!
	19 Á *suila Prisca ar Aquila ar Onesifóro nosse! 
	20 Erasto lemne Corintesse, mal Trofimo hehtanenye hlaiwa Miletosse. 21 Cara ilqua tulien nó i hríve!
	Euvolo *suila lye, ar sie cárar Purens ar Lino ar Hlauria ar ilye i hánor. 
	22 Nai i Heru euva as fairelya! Nai lisserya euva aselde! 

	14 Alexander the copper-smith did numerous evils to me – the Lord will pay him back as his deeds are – 15 and you as well watch yourself concerning him, for he stood against our words in an extremely hostile manner.
	16 When I defended myself on the first occasion, nobody helped me, but they abandoend me – may that not be counted against them – 17 but the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, wishing that by me the preaching shall be completed and that all the nations will hear it; and I was delivered from the lion's mouth. 18 The Lord will deliver me from every evil deed and will save me for his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever! Amen!
	19 Greet Prisca and Aquila and the house of Onesiphorus!
	20 Erastus remained in Corinth, but Trophimus I left behind sick in Miletus [Mileto]. 21 Do everything in order to come before the winter!
	Eubolus [Euvolo] greets you, and so do Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers.
	22 May the Lord be with your [sg.]  spirit! May his grace be with you! [pl.]

