Evandilyon Mattéo

Gospel of Matthew

Revision of January 31, 2018

---

RANTA 1
Ontaleparma Yésus Hristo, Laviro yondo, Avrahámo yondo: 2 Avraham óne Ísac, ar Ísac óne Yácov, ar Yácov óne Yehúra ar hánoryar, 3 Yehúra óne Peres ar Sera as Tamar, ar Peres óne Hesron, ar Hesron óne Ram, 4 ar Ram óne Amminarav, ar Amminarav óne Naxon, ar Naxon óne Salmon, 5 ar Salmon óne Voas as Ráhav, ar Voas óne Óver as Rút, ar Óver óne Yesse, 6 ar Yesse óne Lavir i aran. Ar Lavir óne Solomon i verinen Úrio, 7 ar Solomon óne Rehóvoam, ar Rehóvoam óne Ávia, ar Ávia óne Ása, 8 ar Ása óne Yóhyafat, ar Yóhyafat óne Yóram, ar Yóram óne Ussia, 9 ar Ussia óne Yótam, ar Yótam óne Áħas, ar Áħas óne Ħesecia, 10 ar Ħesecia óne Manasse, ar Manasse óne Ámon, ar Ámon óne Yosía, 11 ar Yosía óne Yeconya ar hánoryar, i lúmesse ya i lie náne tulyana oa ve etyar Vávelenna.

CHAPTER 1
Genealogy [ontaleparma, descent-book] of Jesus Christ, David's son, Abraham's son: 2 Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jakob begat Juda [Jehuda] and his brothers, 3 Juda begat Perez and Zerah with Tamar, and Perez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Ram, 4 and Ram begat Amminadab, and Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon, 5 and Salmon begat Boaz with Rahab, and Boaz begat Obed with Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse, 6 and Jesse begat David the king. And David begat Solomon by the wife of Uriah, 7 and Solomon begat Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asa, 8 and Asa begat Joshaphat, and Joshaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Uzziah, 9 and Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz begat Hezekiah, 10 and Hezeciah begat Manasseh, and Manasseh begat Amon, 11 and Amon begat Jeconiah and his brothers, at the time that the people was led away as exiles to Babel [Babylon].

	12 Apa i *autulyale Vávelenna Yeconya óne Hyealtiel, ar Hyealtiel óne Seruvável, 13 ar Seruvável óne Áviur, ar Áviur óne Elyacim, ar Elyacim óne Ásor, 14 ar Ásor óne Sároc, ar Sároc óne Ácim, ar Ácim óne Eliur, 15 ar Eliur óne Eleásar, ar Eleásar óne Mattan, ar Mattan óne Yácov, 16 ar Yácov óne Yósef verurya María, lo ye Yésus, ye ná estaina Hristo, náne nóna.

	12 After the deportation to Babel Jeconiah begat Shealtiel, and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel, 13 and Zerubbabel begad Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor, 14 and Azor begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud, 15 and Eliud begat Eleazar, ar Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob, 16 and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary [María], by whom Jesus, who is called Christ, was born. 

	17 Sie ilye i *nónari Avrahamello Lavirenna náner canaque, ar Lavirello i *autulyalenna Vávelenna ear *nónari canaque, ar i *autulyalello Vávelenna i Hristonna *nónari canaque. 
	18 Mal Yésus Hristo náne nóna mi lé sina: Íre amillerya María náne nauta vestien Yósef, anes hírina as hína i Aire Feanen, nó anette *ertane. 19 Mal Yósef verurya, ye náne faila ar ua merne nucume se, merne lerya se nuldave. 20 Mal apa sannes sin, yé! i Heruo vala túle senna oloresse, quétala: “Yósef Lavirion, áva ruce mapiello María verilya coalyanna, an ya ná nostana sesse i Aire Feanen ná. 21 Coluvas yondo, ar estuvalyes Yésus, an etelehtuvas lierya úcariltallon!” 22 Ilye sine nati martaner carien nanwa ya i Heru carampe tercánoryanen, quétala: 23 “Yé! i vende nauva as hína ar coluva yondo, ar antauvalte sen i esse Immanuel” – ya tea “Aselve Eru”. 24 Tá Yósef, apa cuivierya húmeryallo, carne ve i Heruo vala cannelyane sen, ar nampes verirya coaryanna. 25 Mal uas sinte se nó coldes yondo, ar antanes sen i esse Yésus.

	17 Thus all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen, and from David to the deportation to Babel there are fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babel to Christ fourteen generations.
	18 But Jesus Christ was born in this manner: When his mother Mary was obliged to marry Joseph, she was found [to be] with child by Holy Spirit, before they were united. 19 But Joseph her husband, who was just and did not wish to humiliate her, wanted to release her secretly. 20 But after he thought this, behold! the Lord's angel came to him in a dream, saying: “Joseph son of David, do not be afraid of taking Mary your wife to your house, for [that] which is conceived in her is by the Holy Spirit. 21 She will bear a son, and you will name him Jesus, for he will deliver his people from their sins.” 22 All these things happened in order to make true [that] which the Lord said by his herald [or, prophet], saying: 23 “Behold! the maiden will be with child and will bear a son, and they will give him the name Immanuel” – which means “With us [is] God.” 24 Then Joseph, after his awakening from his sleep, did as the Lord's angel had commanded him, and he took his wife to his house. 25 But he did not know her before she bore a son, and he gave him the name Jesus.

RANTA 2
Apa Yésus náne nóna Vet-Lehemesse Yúreo, mi Herol i arano rí, en! elentirmor rómenye ménallon túler Yerúsalemenna, 2 quétala: “Masse ná ye anaie nóna aran Yúraron? An Rómesse cennelme tinwerya, ar utúlielme luhtien epe se!” 3 Íre hlasses si, Aran Herol náne valtaina, ar quanda Yerúsalem óse, 4 ar comyala ilye i hére *airimor ar i parmangolmor imíca i lie, maquentes téna pa masse i Hristo nauvane nóna. 5 Quentelte senna: “Vet-Lehemesse Yúreo, an sie ná técina lo i *Erutercáno: 6 'Ar elye, Vet-Lehem Yúreo, laume ná i ampitya imíca i cánor Yúreo; an elyello tuluva túro, ye nauva mavar Israel lienyan.' ”

CHAPTER 2
After Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, behold! star-gazers from eastern regions came to Jerusalem, 2 saying: “Where is [the one] who has been born king of the Jews? For in the East we saw his star, and we have come to bow before him.” 3 When he heard this, King Herod was stirred up, and all of Jerusalem with him, 4 and gathering all the chief priests and the scribes among the people, he asked them about where the Christ was to be born. 5 They said to him: “In Bethlehem of Judea, for so [it] is written by the prophet: 6 'And you, Bethlehem of Judea, is by no means the smallest among the governors of Judea; for from you shall come a ruler, who will be a shepherd for my people Israel.”

	7 Tá Herol nuldave tultane i elentirmor ar maquente te pa i minya lú ya cennelte i tinwe. 8 Te-mentanes Vet-Lehemenna quétala: “Mena, á cesta i hína, ar íre ihírieldes, nyara nin, polienyan lelya luhtien senna, yú inye!” 9 Íre hlasselte i aran lendelte oa, ar yé! i tinwe ya cennelyanelte Rómesse lende epe te, tenna pustanes or i nóme yasse enge i hína. 10 Cenie i tinwe antane tien túra alasse. 11 Lendelte mir i coa ar cenner i hína as María amillerya, ar lantala undu luhtanelte senna. Pantanelte harmaltar ar antaner sen annali: malta ar *ninquima ar níşima suhte.
	12 Mal íre náne tien nyárina oloresse pa i raxe nanweniéno Herolenna, lendelte nóreltanna hyana mallenen.  

	7 Then Herod secretly summoned the star-gazers and asked them about the first time that they saw the star. 8 He sent them to Bethlehem saying: “Go, seek the child, and when you have found him, tell me, for me to be able to go to bow before him, I as well.” 9 When they heard the king they went away, and look! the star that they had seen in the East went before them, until it stopped above the place where the child was. 10 Seeing the star gave them great joy. 11 They went inside the house and saw the child with Mary its mother, and falling down they bowed to him. They opened their treasures and gave to him gifts: gold and frankincense and fragrant resin.
	12 But when they were told [lit. when it was told to them] in a dream about the danger of returning to Herod, they went to their land by another road.

	13 Apa oantelte, yé! Héru vala tannexe Yósefen oloresse, quétala: “Á orta, á mapa i hína ar amillerya ar uşa Mirrandorenna, ar á lemya tasse tenna quetuvan lyenna; an Herol cestuva i hína nehtien se!” 14 Ar orontes ar nampe i hína ar amillerya óse lómisse, ar oantes Mirrandorenna, 15 ar lemnes tasse tenna Herolo qualme. Sie náne carna anwa ya quétina né lo i Heru tercánoryanen, quétala: “Et Mirrandorello yallen yondonya!”

	After they went away, look! an angel of the Lord showed himself to Joseph in a dream, saying: “Rise, take the child and its mother and flee to Egypt, and remain there until I shall tell you; for Herod will seek the child to kill it.” 14 And he arose and took the child and its mother with him at night, and he went away to Egypt, 15 and he remained there until Herod's death. Thus was made true what was said by the Lord through [-nen] his prophet [tercáno, herald], saying: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”

	16 Tá Herol, cénala i anes carna auco lo i elentirmor, náne quátina túra ahanen, ar mentanes ohtalli nehtien ilye seldor Vet-Lehemesse ar ilye i ménassen pelila sa, ho loa atta ar nu ta, ve i lúme pa ya camnelyanes istya i elentirmollon. 17 Tá náne carna anwa ya quétina né ter Yeremía i Erutercáno, quétala: 18 “Óma náne hlárina Ramasse, yaime ar túra nainie – Ráħel yaimea hínaryain, ar uas merne tiutale, an nalte vanwe!”
	19 Apa Herolo qualme, en! Héru vala tannexe Yósefen mi olos Mirrandoresse, 20 ar eques: “Á orta, á mapa i hína ar mena mir Israélo nóre, an i merner mapa i híno cuile nar qualini!” 21 Orontes ar nampe i hína ar amillerya ar lende mir Israélo nóre. 22 Mal íre hlasses i Arcelaüs turne Yúreasse nómesse Herol ataryo, runces meniello tar. Oloresse náne sen nyárina pa raxerya, ar oantes mir i ména Alíleo. 23 Túles ar marne ostosse estaina Násaret, carien nanwa ya náne quétina ter i Erutercánor: “Nauvas estaina Násarya!”

	16 Then Herod, seeing that he was made a fool by the star-gazers, was filled with great rage, and he sent soldiers [ohtar-li > ohtalli] to kill all boys in Bethlehem and in all the regions surrounding it, from two years and under that, according to the time of which he had received knowledge from the star-gazers. 17 Then was made true [that] which was spoken through Jeremiah the Prophet, saying: 18 “A voice was heard in Rama, wailing and great lament – Rachel wailing for her children, and she did not want comfort, for they are gone.”
	19 After Herod's death, behold! an angel of the Lord showed himself to Joseph in a dream in Egypt, 20 and he said: “Rise, take the child and go into the land of Israel, for those who want to take the child's life are dead.” 21 He arose and took the child and its mother and went into the land of Israel. 22 But when he heard that Arcelaus ruled in Judea in the place of Herod his father, he feared to go there. In a dream he was told about his danger, and he went away into the region of Galilee. 23 He came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, to make true [that] which was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Nazarene.”


RANTA 3
Yane auressen túle Yoháno i *Sumbando, carala sinwa mi ravanda Yúreo: 2 “Hira inwis, an menelo aranie utúlie hare!” 3 An nér sina náne pa ye carampe Yesaia i Erutercáno íre quentes: “I óma queno yámala i ravandasse: Alde manwa i Heruo malle, cara tieryar tére!”
4 Yoháno náne vaina collasse findíva ulumpion ar sáme  *aluquilta *os osweryar, ar matsorya náne *salquecápor ar verca lis. 5 Tá Yerúsalem ar quanda Yúrea ar i quanda nóre pelila Yordan etelender senna, 6 ar anelte sumbane lo sé Yordan·síresse, *etequétala úcareltar. 

CHAPTER 3
In those days came John the Baptist, making known in the wilderness of Judea: 2 “Find repentance, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.” 3 For this man was [the one] of whom Isaiah the Prophet spoke when he said: “The voice of person crying in the wilderness: You are to prepare the Lord's way, make his paths straight!”
4 John was wrapped in a cloak of hairs of camels and had a leather-belt around his hips, and his food was grasshoppers and wild honey. 5 Then Jerusalem and all of Judea and the entire land surrounding Jordan went out to him, 6 and they were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.

7 Íre cennes rimbe Farisali ar Sandúceali túla i sumbienna, quentes téna: “Nónar laucion, man peantane len uşe i túlala rúşello? 8 Tá cola yáve valda i inwisso! 9 Ar áva sana i lertalde quete indenna: 'Atarelva Avraham ná' – an inye quete lenna in Eru pole orta ama híni Avrahámen sine sarnillon. 10 Yando sí i pelecco cáya ara şundor i aldaron: Sie ilya alda ya ua cole mára yáve nauva círina undu ar hátina mir i náre. 11 Inye sumba le nennen, mir inwis. Mal ye tuluva apa ni ná taura epe ni – inye ua valda mapa i hyapatu talyalto. Sé le-sumbuva Aire Feanen ar nárenen. 12 *Saltamarya ea máryasse, ar poituvas *vattarestarya. Comyauvas orirya mir i haura, mal i *ospor urtauvas nárenen ya úquen pole *luhtya.

7 When he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees come to the baptism, he said to them: “Offspring of serpents, who taught you to escape from the coming wrath? 8 Then bear fruit worthy of the repentance! 9 And do not think that you may say to yourselves: 'Our father is Abraham' – for I say to you that God can rise up children to Abraham from these stones. 10 Even now the ax is lying by the roots of the trees: Thus every three that does not bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. 11 I baptize you with water, into repentance. But [the one] that comes after me is mightier than I – I am not worthy to take the shoes from his feet. He will baptize you with Holy Spirit and with fire. 12 His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his grain into the store, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that nobody can extinguish.

13 Tá Yésus lende Alíleallo Yordanna ar túle Yohánonna náven sumbana lo se. 14 Mal Yoháno váquente senna, ar eques: “Maurenya ná i inye nauva sumbana lo lyé, ar elye túla ninna!” 15 Mal hanquentasse Yésus quente: “Ásan lave marta, an sie ná vent vanima care ilqua ya faila ná!” Tá hé láve sen. 16 Apa Yésus náne sumbana túles térave et i nenello, ar yé! menel náne sen pantana, ar cennes Eruo Faire túla undu senna ve cucua. 17 Yé! yú enge óma menello ya quente: “Si ná yondonya, i melda, yenen nanye fastana!” 

13 Then Jesus went from Galilee to Jordan and came to John to be baptized by him. 14 But John denied him, and he said: “My need is that I will be baptized by you, and you are coming to me!”15 But in answer Jesus said: “Allow it to happen, for thus it is proper for us [dual] to do everything that is just.” Then he allowed him [to come]. 16 After Jesus was baptized he came straightway out of the water, and behold! heaven was opened to him, and he saw God's Spirit coming down upon him like a dove. 17 Behold! [there] was also a voice from heaven that said: “This is my son, the beloved, with [lit. by] whom I am pleased!”

RANTA 4
Tá Yésus náne tulyana lo i Faire ama mir i erume, náven sahtana lo i Arauco. 2 Uas mante auressen *canaquean ar lómissen *canaquean, ar apa lúme sina anes maita. 3 Ar i *Sahtando túle senna ar quente: “Qui elye Eruo yondo ná, queta sine sarninnar: Ola massar!” 4 Mal hanquentasse quentes: “Ná técina: Atan ua coita rie massanen, mal ilya quettanen ya tule Eruo antollo!”
5 Tá i Arauco se-talle i aire ostonna ar se-panyane i cordo telmasse. 6 Quentes senna: “Qui elye Eruo yondo ná, hata inse undu, an ná técina: Canuvas valaryain pa lye, ar coluvaltel máltatse, pustien talelya petiello sarnenna!” 7 Eque Yésus: “Ata ná técina: Áva tyasta i Heru Ainolya!”

CHAPTER 4
Then Jesus was led by the spirit up into the desert, to be tempted by the Devil. 2 He did not eat for forty days and forty nights, and after this time he was hungry. 3 And the Tempter came to him and said: “If you are God's son, say to these stones: Become breads!” 4 But in answer he said: “It is written: Man does not live only by bread, but by every word that comes from God's mouth.”
	5 Then the Devil led him to the holy city and put him at the pinnacle of the temple. 6 He said to him: “If you are God's son, throw yourself down, for [it] is written: He will command his angels concerning you, and they will carry you on their hands, to stop your foot from striking against [any] stone.” 7 Jesus said: “Again [it] is written: Do not test the Lord your God!”

8 Ata i Arauco se-talle ita tára orontenna, ar tanne sen ilye i aranier cemeno ar alcarelta. 9 Ar quentes senna: “Ilye nati sine antauvan elyen qui lantal undu ar *tyeril ni!” 10 Tá Yésus quente senna: “Heca, Sátan! An ná técina: I Heru Ainolya alye *tyera, ar sé erinqua alye *veuya!” 11 Tá i Arauco oante sello, ar yé! valali túler ar *veuyaner se.
12 Apa hlarie i Yoháno náne panyana mandosse, lendes oa mir Alílea. 13 Oantes Násaretello ar túle ar marne Capernaumesse ara ear, Sevulondo ar Naftalio ménassen, 14 carien anwa ya náne quétina ter Yesaia i Erutercáno íre quentes: 15 “A nóre Sevulondo ar Naftalio, i earmalle Yordan pella, Alílea i nórion! 16 I lie hámala morniesse cenne hoa cala, ar in hamner ñuruhuineo ménasse cala oronte!” 17 Lúme yanallo carnes mentarya sinwa ar quente: “Hira inwis, an menelo aranie utúlie hare!”

8 Again the Devil brought him to an extremely high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of earth and their glory. 9 And he said to him: “All these things I will give to you if you fall down and you worship me.” 10 Then Jesus said to him: “Begone, Satan! For [it] is written: The Lord your God you are to worship, and he alone you are to serve.” 11 Then the Devil went away from him, and behold! angels came and served him.
	12 After hearing that John was put in prison, he went off into Galilee. 13 He went away from Nazareth and came and dwelt in Capernaum beside [the] sea, in Zebulon's and Naphtali's regions, 14 to make true [that] which was said through Isaiah the Prophet when he said: 15 “O land of Zebulon and Naphtali, the sea-road beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations! 16 The people sitting in darkness saw a great light, and to [those] who sat in the region of death-shadow, light arose.” 17 From that time he made his message known and said: “Find repentance, for the kingdom of heaven has come near!”

18 Vantala ara Ear Alíleo cennes háno atta, Símon ye ná estaina Péter ar Andréas hánorya, hátala rembe mir i ear, an anette *raitoli. 19 Ar quentes túna: “Tula, áni hilya, ar caruvan let *raitoli atanion!” 20 Mí imya lú hehtanette rembetta ar se-hilyanet. 21 Lelyala talo cennes yú exe atta yet nánet hánor, Yácov Severaion ar Yohannes hánorya, i luntesse as Severai ataretta, envinyatála rembettar – ar yaldeset. 22 Mi imya lú hehtanette i lunte ar ataretta, ar hilyanettes.
23 Ar lendes ter quanda Alílea, peantala *yomencoaltassen ar carila sinwa i evandilyon pa i aranie ar nestala ilya hlíve ar ilya quáme imíca i lie. 24 Ar i nyarie pa se lende mir quanda Síria, ar tulunelte senna ilye engwar, nwalyaine hlívelínen ar nwalmelínen rimbe nostaleron: raucoharyainali ar ránahlaiwali ar taptali – ar nestanes te. 25 Ar hoe şangar se-hilyaner, ho Alílea ar i Ostor Quean ar Yerúsalem ar Yúrea, ar i nóriello Yordan pella.

18 Walking by the Sea of Galilee he saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter and Andrew his brother, throwing a net into the sea, for they [dual] were fishers. 19 And he said to them: “Come, follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.” 20 In the same moment they left their net and followed him. 21 Going from there he saw also two others who were brothers, James [/Jacob] son of Zebedee and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their [dual] father, repairing their nets – and he called them. 22 In the same moment they abandoned the boat and their father, and followed him.
	23 And he went through all of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and making known the gospel about the kingdom and healing every illness and every sickness among the people. 24 And the story about him went into all of Syria, and they brought to him all ill ones, tormented by illnesses and by torments of many kinds: demon-possessed ones and moon-sick ones and impeded ones – and he healed them. 25 And great crowds followed him, from Galile and the Ten Cities and Jerusalem and Judea, and from the country beyond the Jordan.

RANTA 5
Cénala i şangar lendes ama mir i oron, ar íre hamunes hildoryar túler senna. 2 Ar pantanes antorya ar peantane tien, quétala:
	3 “Valime nar i penyar fairesse, an té haryuvar menelo aranie!
	4 Valime nar i samir naire, an té nauvar tiutane!
	5 Valime nar i moicar, an té nauvar aryoni cemeno!
	6 Valime nar i maitar ar soicar failien, an té nauvar quátine!
	7 Valime nar i antar oravie, an té camuvar oravie!
	8 Valime nar i poicar endo, an té cenuvar Eru!
	9 Valime nar i carir raine, an té nauvar estaine Eruo yondor!
	10 Valime nar i roitainar failiénen, an tien menelo aranie ná!
	11 Valime nalde íre queni le-naityar ar le-roitar ar húrala quetir ilya ulco pa le, castanyanen. 12 Alde na valime ar capa alassenen, an hoa ná *paityalelda menelde.

CHAPTER 5
Seeing the crowds he went up into the mountain, and when he sat down his disciples came to him. 2 And he opened his mouth and instructed them, saying:
	3 “Happy are the lacking ones in spirit, for they will possess the kingdom of heaven!
	4 Happy are the ones that have grief, for they shall be comforted!
	5 Happy are the gentle ones, for they shall be heirs of earth!
	6 Happy are the ones hungry and thirsty for righteousness, for they shall be filled!
	7 Happy are the ones that give mercy, for they will receive mercy!
	8 Happy are the pure of heart, for they shall see God!
	9 Happy are the ones that make peace, or they will be called God's sons!
	10 Happy are the ones persecuted because of righteousness, for the kingdom of heaven is for them!
	11 Happy are you when people abuse you and persecute you and lying say every evil about you, by reason of me. 12 You be happy and leap for joy, for great is your reward in heaven.

13 Elde nar cemeno singe; mal qui i poldore auta i singello, manen singwa tyáverya nanwenuva? Uas ambe mára erya naten, mal ná hátina ettenna, yasse queni *vattuvar sanna.
	14 Elde nar i mardo cala. Osto orontesse ua cúvima. 15 Mo ua narta calma ar sa-panya nu calpa, mal i calmatarmasse, ar caltas ilquenna i coasse. 16 Sie yú elde tyara calalda calta atannar, polieltan cene máre cardaldar ar antaveltan alcar Atareldan, ye ea menelde.
	17 Áva sana in inye utúlie mapien oa i Şanye hya i Erutercánor. Uan utúlie mapien oa, mal carien nanwa! 18 An quetin lenna i menel cemenye autuvat nó erya ampitya tengwa hya erya tehta autuva i Şanyello, nó ilqua anaie carna nanwa. 19 Sie, ilquen ye race er mici i ampitye axani ar peanta atanin sie, isse nauva estaina i ampitya, menelo araniesse. Mal ilquen ye hilya sa ar peanta exi pa sa, isse nauva estaina túra menelo araniesse. 20 An quetin lenna i qui failielda ua túra epe i failie i parmangolmoron ar i Farisaron, laume tuluvalde mir menelo aranie. 

	13 You are the salt of earth; but if the strength goes away from the salt, how will its salty taste come back? It is not [any]more good for a single thing, but is thrown outside, where people will trample upon it.
	14 You are the world's light. A city upon a mountain is not possible to hide. 15 One does not light a lamp and put it under a vessel, but on the lampstand, and it shines on everyone in the house. 16 Thus you as well cause your light to shine upon men, for them to see your good deeds and for them to give glory to your Father, who is in heaven.
	17 Do not think that I have come to take away the Law or the Prophets. I have not come to take away, but to make real! 18 For I say to you that heaven and earth will pass [away] before a single smallest letter or a single mark [tehta: diacritic] will pass away from the Law, before everything has been made true. 19 Thus, everyone that breaks one among the smallest commandments and teaches men so, he will be called the smallest, in the kingdom of heaven. But everyone who follows it and instructs others about it, he shall he called great in the kingdom of heaven. 20 For I say to you that of your righteousness is not greater than the righteousness of the scribes and the Pharisees, you will by no means come into the kingdom of heaven.

21 Hlasselde i náne quétina i yárannar: Áva nahta; mal aiquen ye é nahta tuluva nu namie!  22 Mal inye quete lenna in aiquen ye ná rúşea hánoryanna tuluva nu namie, ar ilquen ye quete hánoryanna: 'Ráca!' nauva námina lo i Tára Ocombe, mal aiquen ye quete 'Auco!' nauva martyana  Ehenno náren!
23 Qui, tá, túlal i *yangwanna tálala annalya, ar tasse enyalil i hánolya same costie aselye, 24 alye hehta annalya tasse epe i *yangwa, ar mena oa: Minyave cara rainelya as hánolya, ar tá, íre enutúliel, lertal tala annalya. 

21 You heard that [it] was said to the old ones: Do not kill, but anyone that does kill will come under judgement! 22 But I say to you that anyone who is angry with [or “against”, -nna] his brother will come under judgement, and anyone who says to his brother: 'Ráca' [= Semitic word of contempt] will be judged by the High Council, but anyone who says: 'Fool!' will be destined for Gehenna's fire!
	23 If, then, you are coming to the altar bringing your gift, and there you recall that your brother has a quarrel with you, 24 you are to leave your gift there before the altar, and go away: First make your peace with your brother, and then, when you have returned, you may bring your gift.  

25 Na linta carien raine as ñottolya lan en nalye óse i mallesse – hya i ñotto antauva lye olla i námon, ar i námo i *námonduren, ar nalye hátina mir mando. 26 Násie quetin lyenna: Laume tulil et talo nó apaitielye i métima pitya mitta tyelpeva!
27 Ahlárielde i anaie quétina: 'Áva race vestale!' 28 Mal inye quete lenna in ilquen ye yéta nís milyala se, yando tá arácie vestale óse endaryasse.

25 Be quick to make peace with your enemy while you are still with him on the road – or the enemy will give you over to the judge, and the judge to the court attendant [námondur: judge-servant], and you will be thrown into prison. 26 Truly I say to you: You will not come out from there before you have payed the last small piece of silver!
	27 You have heard that it has been said: 'Do not break marriage!' 28 But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman longing for her, has even then broken marriage with her in his heart. 

29 Qui forya hendelya le-sahta, ása narca ettenna ar ása hate oa lyello! An qui er mici hroamittalyar vanwa ná, ta ná len arya epe i quanda hroalya ná hátina mir Ehenna. 30 Ar qui formalya lye-sahta, ása aucire ar ása hate lyello. An qui er mici hroamittalyar vanwa ná, ta ná len arya epe i quanda hroalya tule mir Ehenna.
	31 Ná quétaina: Mauya yen lehtaxe veriryallo sen-anta tecie *aumentavéva. 32 Mal inye quete lenna: Ilquen ye lehtaxe veriryallo hequa castanen úpuhtiéva, tyare se race vestale. Ar ye verya nissenna ye anaie mentana oa, race vestale.

	29 If your right eye seduces you, tear it out and throw it away from you! For if one among your body parts is lost, that is for you better than that your entire body is thrown into Gehenna. 30 And if your right hand seduces you, cut it off and throw it away from you. For if one among your body-parts is lost, that is for you better than that your entire body comes into Gehenna.
	31 It is said: It is necessary for the one who divorces [lit. loosens himself from] his wife to give her a writing of divorce [aumentave, away-sending]. 32 But I say to you: Everyone who divorces his wife except by reason of fonication, causes her to break marriage. And who gets married to a woman who has been sent away, breaks marriage.

	33 Ente, ahlárielde i náne quétina i yárannar: Áva anta húrala vanda, mal hepa i Hérun i vandar yar ániel. 34 Mal inye quete lenna: Aqua áva anta vandar, lá menelden, an nas i mahalma Eruva, 35 hya cemennen, an nas i tulco talyant, hya Yerúsalemnen, an nas osto i taura aranwa.
	36 Yando áva anta vandar carelyanen, an ualye pole care erya finde ninque hya morna. 37 Quetielya nauva ná, ná – lá, lá! Ya ná han si, ulcuo ná.

	33 Furthermore, you have heard that [it] was said to the old ones: “Do not give a lying oath, but keep for the Lord the oaths that you have given. 34 But I say to you: Do not give oaths at all, not by heaven [menel-nen > menelden], for it is the throne of God, 35 or by earth, for it is the support for his feet, or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the mighty king.
	36 Also do not give oaths by your head, for you cannot make a single hair white or black. 37  Your speech will be yes, yes – no, no! [That] which is beyond this, is of evil.

	38 Ahlárielde i anaie quétina: Hen henden, ar nelet nelcen! 39 Mal inye quete lenna: Áva tare yenna care ulco lenna. Qui aiquen le-pete forya ventalyasse, quera yú i exe senna. 40 Qui aiquen mere lelya námonna aselye mapien laupelya, ásen lave mapa yando collalya. 41 Ar qui aiquen mauya lye hilya se *larnelta er, á lelya óse *larnelta atta. 42 Á anta yen arca lyello, ar áva quere imle yello mere *yuhta aiqua ya samil.

	38 You have heard that [it] has been said: “An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth! 39 But I say to you: Do not stand against [he] that does evil to you. If anyone strikes you on your right chin, turn also the other one towards him. 40 If anyone wants to go to a judge with you to take your tunic, allow him to take also your cloak. 41 And if anyone compels you to follow him one mile, go with him two miles. 42 Give to [the one] who asks of you, and do not turn [Q: turn yourself] from [anyone] who wants to use anything that you have.

	43 Ahlárielde i ná quétaina: Mela armarolya ar teva ñottolya! 44 Mal inye quete lenna: Mela ñottolyar, á aista i hútar le, cara mai in le-tevir, ar hyama in le-roitar, 45 náveldan híni Atareldo menelde. An isse tyare Anarya orta or ulcar ar mani, ar lave ulo lanta failannar ar úfailannar.
	46 Qui melilde i melir le, mana *paityalelya? Ma i *tungwemor uar care i imya nat? 47 Ar qui *suilal rie hánolyar, manen si ná túra nat? Ma queni i nórion uar care i imya?
	48 Na, tá, ilvane, tambe Atarelda menelde ilvana ná.

	43 You have heard that [it] is said: Love your neighbor and hate your enemy! 44 But I say to you: Love your enemies, bless the ones that curse you, do well to those that hate you, and pray for those that pursue you, 45 for you to be children of your Father in heaven. For he causes his sun to rise over wicked ones and good ones, and lets rain fall upon just ones and unjust ones.
	46 If you love [those] who love you, what is your reward? Do not the tax collectors do the same thing? 
	47 And if you greet only your brothers, how is this a great thing? Do not people of the nations do the same?
	48 Be, then, perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect.

RANTA 6
Cima i ualde care failielda epe atani náven tíraine lo té, hya ualde samuva *paityale Atareldallo menelde. 2 Etta, íre antal annar óraviéva, áva lamya róma epe lye, ve i *imnetyandor carir i *yomencoassen ar i mallessen, camien alcar ho té. Násie quetin lenna: Cámalte quanda *paityalelta. 3 Mal elye, íre antal annar óraviéva, áva lave hyarmalyan ista ya formalya cára; 4 sie annalyar óraviéva nauvar nuldasse; tá Atarelya, ye tíra nuldasse, paityuva lyen.

CHAPTER 6
Take heed that you do not do [/practice] your righteousness in front of men to be watched by them, or you will not have [any] reward from your Father in heaven. 2 Therefore, when you give gifts of mercy, do not sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the roads, to receive glory [or, honor] from them. Truly I say to you: They are receiving their whole reward. 3 But you, when you give gifts of mercy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing; 4 thus your gifts of mercy will be in secret; then your father, who is watching in secret, will reward you.

	5 Ente, íre hyamilde, áva na ve i *imnatyandor, an melilte hyame íre táralte i malleron vincassen, náven cénime atanin. 6 Násie quetin lenna: Cámalte quanda *paityalelta. 7 Mal elye, ire hyamil, mena mir véra şambelya, ar apa holtie fennalya, hyama Atarelyanna ye ea nuldasse; tá Atarelya ye nuldave tíra, paityuva lyen. 7 Mal íre hyámal, áva quete i imye nati mi vorongandale, ve queni i nórion carir, an sanalte i nauvalte hláraine *yuhtiénen rimbe quettali. 8 Etta, áva na ve té, an Eru Atarelda ista maureldar nó arcalde senna.

	5 Therefore, when you [pl.] pray, do not be like the hypocrites, for they love to pray when they are standing on the corners of the roads, in order to be visible to men. 6 Truly I tell you: They are receiving their entire reward. 7 But you [sg.], when you pray, go into your own room, and after closing your door, pray to your Father who is in secret; then your Father who is secretly watching, will pay you. 7 But when you are praying, do not say the same things in monotonous repetition, as people of the [heathen] nations do, for they think that they will be being heard by using numerous words. 8 Therefore, do not be like them, for God your [pl.] Father know your needs before you request [anything] from him.

	9 Hyama, tá, sie: Átarelma menelde, na aire esselya! 10 Aranielya na tuluva! Na care indómelya cemende tambe menelde! 11 Ámen anta síra ilaurea massalma, 12 ar ámen apsene úcarelvar síve elme apsenir tai tien i úcarir elmen. 13 Álame tulya úsahtienna mal áme etelehta ulcullo! Násie!

	9 Pray, then, thus: Our Father in heaven, holy be your name! 10 Let your kingdom come! Let your will be done on earth as in heaven! 11 Give us today our daily bread, 12 and forgive us our sins as we forgive them to them that sin against us. 13 Do not lead us into temptation but deliver us from evil! Amen!

14 Qui apsenilde atanin ongweltar, yú apsenuva len Atarelda menelde; 15 mal qui ualde apsene atanin, Atarelda mi imya lé ua apsenuva ongweldar len. 
	16 Íre helpilde lamate, áva na ve *imnatyandor, i carir cendelelta úvanima carien lamatelta cénima atanin.  Násie quetin lenna: Cámalte quanda *paityalelta. 17 Mal elye, íre hepilde lamate, á panya millo carelyasse ar sova cendelelya. 18 Sie lamatelta ua nauva cénima atanin, mal Atarelyan ye ea nuldasse; ar Atarelya, ye nuldave tíra, paityuva len.

	14 If you forgive men their crimes, your Father in heaven will also forgive you; 15 but if you do not forgive men, your Father will in the same manner not forgive your crimes to you.
	16 When you [pl.] keep a fast, do not be like the hypocrites, who make their face disfigured in order to make their fast visible to men. Truly I say to you: They are receiving their entire reward. 17 But you [sg.], when you keep a fast, put oil on your head and wash your face. 18 Thus your fasting will not be visible to men, but to your Father who is in secret; and your Father, who secretly is watching, will pay [/reward] you.

	19 Áva comya len harmar cemende, yasse malo ar ñwarie ammatir, ar yasse arpor racir minna ar pilir. 20 Mal á comya len harmar menelde, yasse malo ar ñwarie uar ammate, ar yasse arpor uar race minna ar pilir. 21 An yasse harmalya ea, tasse yú endalya euva.
	22 Hroalyo calma ná i hen. Etta, qui hendelya ná málesse, quanda hroalya nauva calima, 23 mal qui hendelya ná olca, quanda hroalya nauva morna. Qui i cala ya ea lyesse ná mornie, manen hoa i mornie ná!

	19 Do not gather for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and erosion devour, and where thieves break in and steal. 20 But gather for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and erosion do not devour, and where thieves do not break in and steal. 21 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. 
	22 Your body's lamp is the eye. Therefore, if your eye is in health, your entire body will be bright, 23 but if your eye is wicked, your entire body will be dark. If the light that is in you is darkness, how great the darkness is!

	24 *Úquen pole náve mól heru attan; tevuvas i mine ar meluva i exe, hya himyuvas i mine ar yeltuva i exe. Ualde pole náve móli Erun ar Mammonden véla.
	25 Etta quetin lenna: Áva na *tarastaine pa inde, pa mana matuvalde hya mana sucuvalde, hya pa hroalya, pa i lanni yar coluvalde. Ma i cuile ua amba epe matta ar i hroa epe i larmar? 26 Cima menelo aiwi, i ualte rere hya *cirihta hya comya mir haurar, ananta meneldea Atarelda anta tien matta. Ma ualde valdie epe té? 27 Man imíca le pole napane erya *perranga coivieryan? 28 Ente, pa lanni, mana castalda náven *tarastaine? Para i resto indilinen, manen ualte mole ar ualte lia, 29 mal nyarin len i Solomon alcareryasse úne tópina ve erya mici té. 30 Qui Eru sie netya i olvar i restasse, i ear sisse síra ar nauvar vanwe enwa, manen ita ambe lárave topuvas lé, elde pitya saviéno? 31 Etta áva na *tarastaine ar quete: “Mana matuvalve?” hya “Mananen topuvalve inwe?” 32 An ilye nati sine i nóri roitar. Mal meneldea Atarelda ista i samilde maure ilye sine nativa.
	33 Á cesta minyave i aranie ar failierya, ar ilye sine nati nauvar napánine len. 34 Etta, áva na *tarastaine pa i hilyala aure, an i hilyala aure samuva vére *tarastieryar. Ilya réo ulco farya san.

	24 Nobody can be a slave for two lords; he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and loathe the other. You cannot be slaves for God and for Mammon alike.
	25 Therefore I say to you: Do not be troubled about yourselves, about what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies, concerning the clothers you will wear.  Is the life not more than food and the body than the clothes? 26 Notice the birds of heaven, that they do not sow or reap or gather into barns [haurar, stores], and yet your heavenly Father gives them food. Are you not more important than them? 27 Who among you can add a single cubit to his life? 28 Furthermore, concerning clothes, what is your reason for being troubled? Learn from [or 'by', -nen] the lilies of the field, how they do not labour and do not twine [threads], 29 but I tell you that Solomon in his glory was not clad as a single [one] among them. 30 If God so adorns the plants in the field, that exist today and will be gone tomorrow, how much more richly will he cover you, you of little faith? 31 Therefore, do not be troubled and say: “What will we eat?” or “With what are we to cover ourselves?” 32 For all these things the nations pursue. But your heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these things.
	33 Seek first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you. 34 Therefore, do not be troubled about the following day, for the following day will have its own troubles. Every day's evil suffices for it.


RANTA 7 
Áva name, lá náven námine, 2 an i námiénen yanen námal nauval námina, ar i lestanen yanen *etelestal nauva *etelestana lyen. 3 Tá manen ná i yétal i lisce hanolyo hendesse, mal ua cime i pano véra hendelyasse? 4 Hya manen ece lyen quete hánolyanna: 'Lava nin tuce i lisce et hendetyallo', íre yé! ea pano véra hendelyasse? 5 *Imnetyando! Minyave tuca i pano et véra hendelyallo, ar tá polil cene manen tuce i lisce et hánolyo hendello.
	
CHAPTER 7
Do not judge, so as not to be judged, 2 for by the judgment with which you are judging you will be judged, and by the measure with which you measure out, [it] will be measured out to you. 3 Then how is [it] that you look at the sedge in your brother's eye, but does not heed the rafter in your own eye? 4 Or how is it possible for you to say to your brother: 'Allow me to pull the sedge out of your eye', when behold! there is a rafter in your own eye? 5 Hypocrite! First pull he rafter out from your own eye, and then you can see how to pull the sedge out of your brother's eye.

	6 Áva anta ya aire ná i huoin; mi imya lé, áva hate marillaldar epe polcar, hya *vattuvaltet nu talultar ar queruvar inte ar narcuvar le.
	7 Á arca, ar nauva len antana; á cesta, ar hiruvalde, á tamba, ar nauva len latyana. 8 An ilquen arcala came, ar ilquen cestala hire, ar ilquenen tambala nauva latyana. 9 Man imíca le, qui yondorya arca massa, antauva sen sar? 10 Hya qui arcas lingwe – lau antauvas sen leuca? 11 Etta, qui elde i nar olce istar anta máre annar hínaldain, manen ita ambe Atarelda ye ea menelde antauva máre nati in arcar sello?
	12 Etta, ilye nati yar merilde cárine len lo atani, cara tien mí imya lé. Ta ná ya tear i Şanye ar i Erutercánor.

	6 Do not give what is holy to the dogs; in the same manner, do not throw your pearls before swine, or they will trample them under their feet and will turn themselves [around] and tear you [up].
	7 Ask, and [it] will be given you; seek, and you shall find, knock, and [it] will be opened to you. 8 For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking [it] will be opened. 19 Who among you, if his son asks for a bread, will give him a stone? 10 Or if he asks for a fish – surely he will not give him a snake? 11 Therefore, if you that are wicked know [how] to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those that ask of him?
	12 Therefore, all things that you want done to you by men, do them in the same manner. That is what the Law and the Prophets mean.

	13 Mena minna ter i náha ando, an palla ar yanda ná i malle ya tulya oa nancarienna, ar rimbe nar i menir minna ter sa, 14 mal náha ná i ando ar lenwa i malle tulyala mir coivie, ar mance nar i hirir sa.
	15 Tira inde pa i *hurutercánor i tulir lenna mámaron lannessen, mal mityasse nalte ammátala ñarmor. 16 Yáveltainen istuvaldet. Queni uar comya *tiumar necelillon hya *relyávi *nastalaimallon, lá? 17 Sie ilya mára alda cole mára yáve, mal ilya quelexima alda care şaura yáve. 18 Mára alda ua pole cole úmirwa yáve; mi imya lé, quelexima alda ua pole cole mára yáve. 19 Ilya alda ya ua cole mára yáve ná círina undu ar hátina mir i náre. 20 É yáveltainen istuvaldet!
	21 Lá ilquen ye quete ninna: Heru, Heru, tuluva mir menelo aranie, mal ye care i indóme Atarinyo ye ea menelde. 22 Rimbali quetuvar nin enta auresse: 'Heru, Heru, ma ualme quente ve Erutercánor esselyanen, ar et-hanter raucor esselyanen, ar carner rimbe taurie cardali esselyanen?' 23 Mal tá nyaruvan tien: 'Uan oi sinte le! Oa nillo, elde i racir i şánye!”

	13 Go inside through the narrow gate, for broad and wide is the road that leads away to destruction, and numerous are the ones that go inside through it, 14 but narrow [náha] is the gate and narrow [or 'thin', lenwa] is the road leading into life, and few are [the ones] that find it. 15 Watch yourselves concerning the false prophets that come to you in sheep's clothing, but on the inside they are devouring wolves. 16 By their fruits you will know them. People do not gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, no? 17 Thus every good tree bears good fruit, but every rotten tree produces foul fruit. 18 A good tree cannot bear worthless fruit; in the same manner, a rotten tree cannot bear good fruit. 19 Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. 20 Indeed by their fruit you will know them! 
	21 Not everyone who says to me: Lord, Lord, will come into the kingdom of heaven, but [the one] who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. 22 Numerous ones will say to me in that day:  'Lord, Lord, did we not speak as prophets in your name, and throw out demons in your name, and do many mighty deeds in your name?' 23 But then I will tell them: 'I did not ever know you! Away from me, you who break the law!'

	24 Etta ilquen ye hlare sine quettanyar nauva ve handa nér, ye carastane coarya i ondosse. 25 Ar i ulo ulle undu, ar i oloiri túler, ar i súri vávaner ar penter coa tananna, mal uas lantane, an anes tulcana i ondosse. 
	26 Ente, ilquen ye hlare sine quettanyar ar uar care ve tai ná ve úhanda nér, ye carastane coarya i litsesse. 27 Ar i ulo ulle undu, ar i oloiri túler, ar i súri vávaner ar penter coa tananna, ar talantes, ar lantarya náne hoa!”
	28 Sí íre Yésus telyane ilye quettar sine, i şángar náner elmendasse peantieryanen, 29 an peantanes ve quén arwa túreo, ar lá ve parmangolmoltar.

	24 Therefore everyone who hears these words of mine will be like an intelligent man, who built his house on the rock. 25 And the rain poured down, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, but it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock.
	26 Furthermore, everyone that hears these words of mine and does not do according to them is like an unintelligent man, who built his house on the sand. 27 And the rain poured down, and the floods came, and the winds blew and struck against that house, and it collapsed, and its fall was great!”
	28 Now when Jesus finished all these words, the crowds were in wonder at [-nen] his teaching, 29 for he taught them as a person having authority, and not like their scribes.

RANTA 8 
Ar apa túles undu i orontello hoe şangar hilyaner se. 2 Ar yé, halmahlaiwa quén túle senna ar lantane undu epe se, quétala: “Heru, qui meril, polil poita ni!” 3 Ar rahtala máryanen se-appanes, quétala: “Merin! Na poica!” Ar mi imya lú anes poitana halmahlíveryallo. 4 Ar Yésus quente senna: “Cena i quetil munta aiquenna, mal mena, á tana imle i *airimon, ar *yaca i anna ya Móses canne, ve *vettie tien!”

CHAPTER 8
And after he came down from the mountain huge throngs followed him. 2 And look, a leprous person cane to him and fell down before him, saying: “Lord, if you wish, you can cleanse me!” 3 And reaching out with his hand he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be clean!” And in the same moment he was cleansed from his leprosy [halmahlíve, skin-disease]. 4 And Jesus said to him: “See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest, and sacrifice the gift that Moses commanded, as a witness to them!” 

	5 Ar íre lendes mir Capernaum, *tuxantur túle senna, arcala senna 6 ar quétala: “Heru, núronya caita *lalevíte i coasse, arwa rúcime ñwalmaron!” 7 Ar quentes senna: “Íre tulin, nestuvanyes!” 8 Mal i *tuxantur hanquente sie: “Heru, uan valda i tulil nu tópanya, mal qui rie quetil i quetta, núronya nauva nestana. 9 An yú inye ná nér panyana nu túre, arwa ohtarion nu ni, ar qui quetin quén sinanna: Mena!, tá ménas, ar exenna: Tula!, tá túlas, ar núronyanna: Cara si!, tá carises!”

	And when he went into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, petitioning of him 6 and saying: “Lord, my servant lies lame in the house, having terrible pains!” 7 And he said to him: “When I come, I shall heal him!” 8 But the centurion answered him: “Lord, I am not worthy that you come under my roof, but if you solely say the word, my servant will be healed. 8 For I as well am a man put under authority, having soldiers under me, and if I say to this person: Go!, then he is going, and to another: Come!, then he is coming, and to my servant: Do this!, then he does it!”

	10 Hlárala ta, Yésus náne quátina elmendanen ar quente innar hilyaner se: “Násie quetin lenna, taite savie uan ihírie aiquende Israelde. 11 Mal quetin lenna i tuluvar rimbali Rómello ar Númello ar caituvar ara i sarno as Avraham ar Ísac ar Yácov menelo araniesse, 12 lan i araniéno yondor nauvar hátine mir i mornie i ettesse. Tasse euvar yaiwelta ar mulielta nelciva!” 13 Tá Yésus quente i *tuxanturenna: “Mena! Síve asáviel, tambe á marta lyen!” Ar i núro náne nestana yana lúmesse. 

	Hearing that, Jesus was filled with wonder and said to [the ones] that followed him: “I truly say to you, such faith I have not found in anyone in Israel. 11 But I say to you that numerous ones will come from East and West and will lie at the table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, 12 while the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the darkness on the outside. There will be their waiting and their grinding of teeth! 13 Then Jesus said to the centurion: “Go! As you have believed, so let it happen for you!” And the servant was healed in that hour.

	14 Ar Yésus, íre túles mir coarya Péter, cenne veriryo amil caimassea ar hlaiwa úrenen. 15 Ar Yésus appane márya, ar i úre váne hello. Ar hé oronte ar *veuyane sen.
	16 Mal apa şinye túle, queni taller senna rimbali i náner haryane lo raucor, ar et-hantes i raucor quettanen, ar nestanes illi i perpéraner, 17 carien nanwa ya náne quétina ter Yesaia i Erutercáno, quétala: “Sé nampe hlívelvar ar colde quámelvar!”

	14 And Jesus, when he came into Peter's house, saw his wife's mother bedridden and sick with a fever. 15 And Jesus touched her hand, and the fever vanished from her. And she arose and ministered to him.
	16 But after evening came, people brought to him many that were possessed by demons, and he threw out the demons with a word, and he healed all that were suffering, 17 making true what was written through Isaiah the Prophet, saying: “He took our illnesses and bore our sicknesses!”

	18 Íre Yésus cenne şanga ya pelde se, cannes i lelyumnelte i hyana fáranna. 19 Ar parmangolmo túle senna ar quente senna: “*Peantar, hilyuvan lye ilya nómenna yanna lelyal!” 20 Mal Yésus quente senna: “Rusqui samir eccar ar menelo aiwi samir *haustar, mal i Atanyondo ua same nóme yasse lertas panya carya!” 21 Tá exe mici hildoryar quente senna: “Heru, lava nin minyave auta ar tala atarinya sapsaryanna!” 22 Yésus quente senna: “Áni hilya, ar lava i qualinain tala qualinaltar sapsaltannar!”  
	23 Ar íre lendes mir lunte, hildoryar hilyaner se. 24 Ar yé, enge túra amortale i earesse, túpala i lunte i falmainen, mal isse náne lorna. 25 Ar túlelte ar eccoitaner se, quétala: “Heru, áme rehta, quálalme!” 26 Mal quentes téna: “Manen ná i nalde caurie, queni pitya saviéno?” Tá, ortala, naityanes i súri ar i ear, ar enge núra quilde. 27 Mal i neri náner quátine elmendanen ar quenter: “Mana nostaleo ná nér sina, pan yú i súri ar i ear carir ve quetis?”

	18 When Jesus saw a throng that surrounded him, he commanded that they were to go to the other shore. 19 And a scribe came to him and said to him: “Teacher, I will follow you to every place that you go!” 20 But Jesus said to him: “Foxes have holes and the birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of Man does not have a place where he may put his head!” 21 Then another among his disciples sayd to him: “Lord, let me first go away and bring my father to his grave!” 22 Jesus said to him: “Follow me, and let the dead bring their dead ones to their graves!”
	23 And when he went into a boat, his disciples followed him. 24 And look, there was an uprising in the sea, covering the boat with the waves, but he was asleep. 25 And they came and woke him up, saying: “Lord, save us, we are dying!” 26 But he said to them: “How is [it] that you are timid, people of little faith?” Then, standing up, he rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a deep silence. 27 But the men were filled with wonder and said: “Of what kind is this man, since also the winds and the sea do as he says?”

	28 Íre túles i hyana fáranna, mir i nóre i Araryaron, nér atta haryaine lo raucoli vellet se, túlala et i noirillon, ita verce. Etta *úquen sáme i huore cilien tana malle. 29 Ar yé! yámette, quétala: “Mana ment ar lyen, Eruion? Ma utúliel sir nwalien met nó i lúme?” 30 Mal haira tello enge lámáre rimbe polcalíva nesselesse. 31 I raucor arcaner senna, quétala: “Qui et-hatil me, áme menta mir i lámáre polcaiva!” 32 Ar quentes téna: “Mena!” Ar apa ettulie lendelte mir i poicar, ar yé! i quanda lámáre lende rimpa olla i lanca mir i ear, ar quallelte i nenissen. 33 Mal i mavari úşer, ar lelyala mir i osto nyarnelte ilqua, yú pa i raucoharyanar. 34 Ar yé! i quanda osto etelende velien Yésus, ar apa cenie se, hortaneltes auta ménaltallon.

	28 When he came to the other shore, into the land of the Gadarenes, two men possessed by demons met him, coming from the graves, extremely fierce. Therefore nobody had the courage to choose that road. 29 And behold! they cried [out], saying: “What is to us [dual] and to you, Son of God? Have you come hither to torment us [dual] before the time?” 30 But far from them was a herd of many pigs on pasture. 31 The demons asked of him, saying: “If you throw us out, send us into the herd of pigs!” 32 And he said to them: “Go!” And after coming out they went into the pigs, and behold! the entire herd wend rushing over the precipice into the sea, and they died in the waters. 33 But the shepherds [or, herders] fled, and going into the city they told everything, also concerning the demon-possessed ones. 34 And behold! the entire city went out to meet Jesus, and after seeing him, they urged him to go away from their regions.

RANTA 9
Ar lelyala mir i lunte lahtanes i ear ar lende mir véra ostorya. 2 Ar yé, tallelte senna *lalevíte nér caitala caimasse. Cénala savielta Yésus quente i *lalevítenna: “Huore, hína! Úcaretyar nar apsénine!” 3 Ar yé, queneli mici i parmangolmor quenter intenna: “Nér sina naiquéta!” 4 Ar Yésus, istala sanweltar, quente: “Manen ná i sánealde olce natali endaldasse? 5 An mana i ambe ancárima nat quetien: Úcaretyar nar apsénine, hya: Á orta ar vanta – ? Mal istieldan in i Atanyondo same túre cemende apsenien úcari –” tá quentes i *lalevítenna: “Á orta, á mapa caimalya ar mena marelyanna!” 7 Ar orontes ar lende maryanna. 8 Cénala ta, i şangar náner ruhtaine ar antaner alcar Erun, ye antane taite túre atanin.

CHAPTER 9
And going into the boat he crossed the sea and went into his own city. 2 And behold, they brought to him a lame man lying on a bed. Seeing their faith Jesus said to the lame one: “Courage, child! Your sins are forgiven!” 2 And behold, some among the scribes said to themselves: “This man is blaspheming!” 4 And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said: “How is [it] that you are thinking wicked things in your heart? 5 For what is the more easy thing to say: Your sins are forgiven, or: Rise and walk – ? But for you to know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins – ” then he said to the lame one: “Rise, take your bed and go to your home!” 7 And he arose and went to his home. 8 Seeing that, the crowds were terrified and gave glory to God, who gave such power to men.

	9 Ar autala talo Yésus cenne nér hára i *tungwemende, estaina Mattéo, ar quentes senna: “Áni hilya!” Ar orontes ar hilyane se. 10 Epeta, íre caines ara i sarno i coasse, yé! rimbe *tungwemóli ar úcarindoli túler ar cainer tasse as Yésus ar hildoryar. 11 Mal cénala ta, i Farisar quétaner hildoryannar: “Manen ná i *peantarelda mate as *tungwemóli ar úcarindoli?” 12 Hlárala sa quentes: “Queni málesse uar same maure aşarova, mal i nimpar. 13 Mena ar para ya si tea: Merin óravie ar lá *yacie. An túlen yalien, lá failar, mal úcarindor!”

	9 And going away from there Jesus saw a man sit at the tax office, called Matthew, and he said to him: “Follow me!” And he arose and followed him. 10 Thereafter, when he lay by the table in the house, behold! many tax collectors and sinners came and lay there with Jesus and his disciples. 11 But seeing that, the Pharisees were saying to his disciples: “How is [it] that your teacher eats with the tax collectors and sinners? 12 Hearing it he said: “People in health do not have [any] need of a healer, but the ailing ones [do]. 13 Go and learn what this means: I want mercy and not sacrifice. For I came to call, not righteous ones, but sinners!”

	14 Tá Yoháno i *Sumbando hildor túler senna ar maquenter: “Manen ná i elme ar i Farisar hepir lamati, mal hildolyar uar hepe lamati?” 15 Ar Yésus quente téna: “I endero meldor lau polir same naire íre i ender ea aselte? Mal rí tuluvar íre i ender nauva mapana oa tello, ar tá hepuvalte lamati. 16 *Úquen tace *lilma *alapihta lanneo yára collasse, an quanta túrerya tucuva sallo, ar euva ambe faica narcie. 17 Ente, *úquen panya vinya limpe yáre *helmolpessen, mal qui mo é care sie, i *helmolpi nar *rúvine ar i limpe ulya ettenna ar i *helmolpi nar nancarne. Mal queni panyar vinya limpe vinye *helmolpessen, ar yúyo lemyat!”

	14 Then John the Baptist's disciples came to him and asked: “How is [it] that we and the Pharisees keep fasts, but your disciples do not keep fasts?” 15 And Jesus said to them: “The friends of the bridegroom surely cannot have grief while the bridegroom is with them? But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will keep fasts. 16 No one fastens a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old cloak, for its full power will pull from it, and there will be a worse tearing. 22 Furthermore, no one puts new wine in old skin-bottles, but if one does do so, the skin-bottles are ruptured and the wine pours out and the skin-bottles are destroyed. But people put new wine in new skin-bottles, and both remain!”

	18 Íre nyarnes téna nati sine, yé! tur túle hare ar luhtane senna, quétala: “Selyenya *şintanéya qualle, mal tula ar á panya málya sesse, ar nanwenuvas coivienna!”
	19 Tá Yésus oronte ar se-hilyane, as hildoryar. 20 Ar yé! nís arwa celumeo serceva ter loar yunque túle ca se ar appane collaryo lane, 21 an quentes insenna: “Qui eryave appan collarya nauvan rehtana!” 22 Yésus quernexe ar, tuntala se, quente: “Huore, selye! Savielya erehtie lye!” Ar yana lúmello i nís sáme mále.

	18 While he told them these things, behold! a ruler came near and bowed to him, saying: “My daughter died a little while ago, but come and put your hand on her, and she will return to life!”
	19 Then Jesus arose and followed him, with his disciples. 20 And behold! a woman having a flood of blood for [ter, through] twelve years came behind him and touched the rim of his cloak, 21 for she said to herself: “If only I touch his cloak I shall be saved!” 22 Jesus turned and, noticing her, said: “Courage, daughter! Your faith has saved you!” And from that time the woman had health.

	23 Íre túles coanna i turwa ar cenne i simpetari ar i şanga cárala yalme, 24 Yésus quente: “Á auta silo, an i vende ua qualle, mal náse lorna!” Tá lalanelte senna yaiwenen. 25 Apa mentave i şanga ettenna lendes minna ar nampe márya, ar i vende oronte. 26 Ar nyarna sina ettúle quanda sana ménanna.
	27 Íre Yésus lahtane talo, laceníte nér atta hilyanet se, yámala ar quétala: “Órava metse, Lavirion!” 28 Apa menie mir i coa, i laceníti túler senna, ar Yésus quente senna. “Ma saviste i polin care si?” Hanquentette senna: “Ná, Heru!” 29 Tá appanes henduttat, quétala: “Nai martuva lent ve saviste!” 30 Ar henduttat camnet *céne. Ente, Yésus tulcave canne tun, quétala: “Cena in *úquen ista sa!” 31 Mal tú, íre lendette ettenna, nyarne pa se mi quanda sana ména.

	23 When he came to the house of the ruler and saw the flute-players and the crowd making clamour, 24 Jesus said: “Go away from here, for the maiden did not die, but she is asleep. Then they laughed at him with scorn. 25 After sending the crowd outside he went inside and took her hand, and the maiden arose. 26 And this story went out to that entire region. 
	27 When Jesus passed along from there, two blind men followed him, crying and saying: “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”  28 After going into the house, the sightless ones came to him, and Jesus said to them: “Do you believe that I can do this?” They answered him: “Yes, Lord!” 29 Then he touched their eyes, saying: “May it happen to you as you believe!” 30 And their eyes received sight. Furthermore, Jesus firmly commanded them, saying: “See that no one knows it!” 31 But they, when they went outside, told about him to in that entire region.

	32 Sí íre oantelte, yé! queni taller senna úpa nér haryaina lo rauco, 33 ar apa i rauco náne et-hátina, i úpa nér carampe. I şangar náner quátine elmendanen ar quenter: “Nat ve si ua oi anaie cénina Israelde!” 34 Mal i Farisar quenter: “I raucoron herunen et-hatis i raucor!”
	35 Ar Yésus lende rindesse ilye i ostonnar ar mastonnar, peantala *yomencoaltassen ar cárala sinwa i evandilyon i araniéno ar nestala ilya nostale hlíveo ar ilya nostale nimpiéno. 36 Íre cennes i şangar, endarya etelende téna,  an anelte helde ar vintane ve mámar ú mavaro. 37 Tá quentes hildoryannar: “I yávie hoa ná, mal i molir nar mance. Etta arca i yaviéno Herunna i mentauvas *molindor yávieryanna!”

	32 Now, when he went away, behold! people brought him a dumb man possessed by a demon, 33 and after the demon was thrown out, the dumb man spoke. The crowds were filled with wonder and said: “A thing like this has not ever been seen in Israel!” 34 But the Pharisees said: “By the lord of the demons he throws out the demons!”
	35 And Jesus went in a circuit to all the cities and villages, instructing in their synagogues and making known the gospel of the kingdom and healing every kind of sickness and every kind of ailment. 36 When he saw the crowds, his heart went out to them, for they were naked and scattered like sheep without a shepherd. 37 Then he said to his disciples: “The harvest is great, but [those] who work are few. Therefore ask of the Lord of the harvest that he will send workers to his harvest!”

RANTA 10
Ar tultanes i hildor yunque ar antane tien túre or úpoice fairi, et-hatieltan te, ar nestieltan ilya hlíve ar ilya nimpa sóma.
	2 Essi i hildoron yunque nar sine: Minyave Símon ye ná estaina Péter, ar Andréas hánorya, ar Yácov yondorya Severai, ar Yohannes hánorya, 3 Filip ar Varşoloméo, Tomas ar Mattéo i *tungwemo, Yácov yondorya Alféo ar Şandéo, 4 Símon i Canáanya ar Yúras Iscariot, ye apa antane se olla.
	5 Yunque sine Yésus etementane, antala tien canwar sine: “Áva mene i mallesse i nórennar, ar áva tule mir Samárea osto. 6 I mende mena i vanwe mámannar Israélo coallo! 7 Lan lelyalde, á cara sinwa i menta, quétala: 'Menelo aranie utúlie hare.' 8 Á nesta hlaiwar, á orta qualinar, á poita halmahlaiwar, et-hata raucor! Acámielde muntan, á anta muntan! 9 Áva panya malta hya telpe hya urus quiltaldasse 10 hya tala mattapoco i lendan, hya laupe atta, hya hyapat hya vandil, an ye mole ná valda mattaryo.

CHAPTER 10  
And he summoned the twelve disciples and gave to them power over unclean spirits, for them to throw them out, and for them to heal every disease and every ailing condition.
	2 [The] names of the twelve disciples are these: First Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, and Jacob the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, 3 Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the tax collector, Jacob the brother of Alpheus and Thaddeus, 4 Simon the Cananean and Judas Iscariot, who after gave him over.
	5 These twelve Jesus sent forth, giving them these commands: “Do not go on the road to the [gentile] nations, and do not come into a Samaritan city. 6 Instead [i mende 'in the place'] go to the lost sheep from the house of Israel! 7 While you go, make known the message, saying: 'The kingdom of heaven has come near.' 8 Heal sick ones, raise dead ones, cleanse skin-diseased ones, throw out demons! You have received [it] for nothing, give [it] for nothing! 9 Do not put gold or silver or copper in your belt 10 or bring a food-pouch for the journey, or two tunics, or shoes or a staff, for [the one] who works is worthy of his food.

	11 Ilya ostosse hya mastosse mir ya tulilde, ceşa man sasse valda ná, ar á lemya tasse tenna autalde. 12 Íre tulilde mir i coa, ása *suila, 13 ar qui i coa valda ná, nai i raine ya merilde san tuluva sanna, mal qui uas valda, nai i raine lello nanwenuva lenna. 14 Quiquie aiquen ua came le hya lasta quettaldannar, íre autalde sana coallo hya sana ostollo, á pale i asto taluldalto. 15 Násie quetin lenna: I Aure Namiéva nauva ambe *cólima Soromo nóren epe sana oston!

	In every city or village into which you come, find out who in it is worthy, and remain there until you go away. 12 When you come into the house, greet it, 13 and if the house is worthy, may the peace that you wish for it come upon it, but if it is not worthy, may the peace from you return to you. 14 Whenever anyone does not receive you or listens to your words, when you go away form that house or from that city, shake the dust from your feet [dual]. 15 Truly I say to you: The Day of Judgement will be more bearable for the land of Sodom than for that city!

	16 Yé! Mentan le ve mámar mici ñarmor. Etta na hande ve leucar ar *cámalóre ve cucuar. 17 Tira inde atannar, an antauvalte le olla *námocombin ar le-riptuvalte *yomencoaltassen. 18 Nauvalde tulyane epe nórecánor ar arani pa inye, ve *vettie tien ar i nórin. 19 Mal íre antalte le olla, áva na *tarastaine pa manen hya mana quetuvalde, an ya quetuvalde nauva len antana lúme entasse. 20 An i quetir uar rie lé, mal Atareldo Faire ye quete lénen. 21 Ente, háno antauva olla háno qualmenna, ar atar hínarya, ar híni ortuvar ontarultanta ar tyaruvar qualmetta. 22 Ar elde nauva tévine lo illi pa essenya, mal ye perpere i mettanna, isse nauva rehtana. 23 Íre roitalte le osto sinasse, uşa hyananna, an násie quetin lenna: Laume telyuvalde i rinde ostoron Israélo nó i Atanyondo tuluva.

	16 Behold! I send you like sheep among wolves. Therefore be intelligent like serpents and guiltless like doves. 17 Watch yourselves against men, for they will give you over to tribunals and will flay you in their synagogues. 18 You will be led before governors and kings concernin me, as a witness to them and to the nations. 19 But when they give you over, do not be troubled about how or what you are to say, for [that] which you are to say will be given to you in that hour. 20 For [the ones] that speak are not only you, but your Father's Spirit that speaks by you. 21 Furthermore, brother will give brother over to death, and a father his child, and children will rise against their parents [dual] and will cause their [dual] death. 22 And you will be hated by all concerning my name, but who endures to the end, he will he saved. 23 When they pursue you in this city, flee to another, for truly I say to you: By no means will you complete the circuit of the cities of Israel before the Son of Man shall come.

	24 Hildo ua or ye peanta se, hya mól or herurya. 25 Farya i hildon qui olis ve ye peanta se, ar i mól ve herurya. Qui queni estaner i *coantur Vélsevul, manen ita ambe estuvalte i queni coaryo sie? 

	24 A disciple is not above [the one] who instructs him, or a slave above his lord. 25 It suffices for the disciple if he becomes like [the one] who instructs him, and the slave like his lord. If people called the householder Beelzebul, how much more will they call the people of his house so?

	26 Etta áva ruce tello. An ea munta tópina ya ua nauva apantana, ar munta nulda ya ua nauva sinwa. 27 Ya nyarin len i morniesse, queta i calasse, ar ya hlarilde hlussaina, ása care sinwa ingallon i coaron. 28 Ar áva ruce illon nahtar i hroa mal uar pole nahta i fea; ambe rongo ruca yello pole nancare fea ar hroa véla Ehennasse. 29 Ma uat filit atta vácine mittan urusteva? Ananta er mici tú ua lanta i talamenna pen Atareldo istya. 30 Mal yando ilye i findi careldasse nar nótine. 31 Etta áva ruce; nalde mirwe epe rimbe filici.

	26 Therefore do not fear them. For there is nothing covered that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not be known. 27 [That] which I tell you in the darkness, say in the light, and [that] which you hear being whispered, make it known from the tops of the houses. 28 And not do fear [those] those that kills the body but cannot kill the soul; sooner [or, rather] fear [the one] that can undo soul and body alike in Gehenna. 29 But are not two sparrows sold for a piece of copper? And yet one among them [dual] does not fall to the ground without your Father's knowledge. 30 But also [or, even] all the hairs on your head are counted. 31 Therefore do not fear; you are more precious than many sparrows. 

	32 Etta ilquen ye *etequeta ni epe atani, yú inye *etequetuva epe Atarinya ye ea menelde; 33 mal aiquen ye láquete ni epe atani, yú inye laquetuva epe Atarinya ye ea menelde. 34 Áva sana i utúlien panien raine cemende; uan túle panien raine, mal macil. 35 An túlen tyarien şancier: nér ataryanna, ar selye amilleryanna, ar nessa veri i amillenna veruryo; 36 ar atano ñottor nar i queni coaryasse. 37 Qui queno atar hya amil ná sen melda epe ni, uas valda nin; ar qui queno yondo hya selye ná sen melda epe ni, uas valda nin. 38 Ar aiquen ye ua mapa tarwerya ar hilya ni ua valda nin. 39 Ye hire cuilerya, sen nauvas vanwa, mal i quén yeo cuile ole vanwa márienyan, hiruva sa. 

	32 Therefore everyone that confesses me before men, I as well will confess before my father who is in heaven; 33 but anyone that denies me before men, I as well will deny before my Father who is in heaven. 34 Do not think that I have come to put peace on earth; I have not come to put peace [here], but a sword. 35 For I came to cause splits: a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a young wife against the mother of her husband; 36 and a man's enemies are the people of his house. 37 If a person's father or mother is dearer to him than I [am], he is not worthy of me; and if a person's son or daughter is dearer to him than me, he is not worthy of me. 38 And anyone that does not take his cross and follows me is not worthy of me. 39 [The] one that finds his life, to him it shall be lost, but the person whose life becomes lost for my sake [lit. for my good], will find it.

	40 Ye came lé came yú ni, ar ye came ni came yú ye ni-mentane. 41 Ye came Erutercáno pan náse Erutercáno, camuva Erutercáno *paityale, ar ye came faila nér pan náse faila, camuva faila nero *paityale. 42 Ar aiquen ye anta quenen mici pityar sine rie yulma ringa neno pan náse hildo – násie quetin lenna, *paityalerya laume nauva vanwa sen. 

	40 [He] that receives you receives also me, and [he] that receives me receives also the one who sent me. 41 [The one] that receives a prophet since he is a prophet, will receive a prophet's reward, and [the one] that receives a just man since he is just, will receive a just man's reward. 42 And anyone that gives to a person among these small ones only a cup of cold water since he is a disciple – truly I say to you, his reward will by no means be lost to him.

RANTA 11 
Apa Yésus telyane cane hildoryain yunque, etementanes te talo, peantien ar carien i menta sinwa ostoltassen. 3 Mal Yoháno, hlárala pa se mandosse, mentane vére hildoryainen 3 ar quente senna: “Ma elye ná ye tulumne, hya hópalme exen?” 4 Hanquentasse Yésus quente téna: “Á auta ar nyara Yohánon yar hláralde ar yar cénalde: 5 I laceníti cenir ata, ar i *lalevíti vantar, i halmahlaiwar nar poitaine ar i *hlárelórar hlárar, ar i qualinar nar ortaine, ar i penyar hlárar i evandilyon carna sinwa, 6 ar valima ná ye inyesse hire munta quérala se oa.

CHAPTER 11
After Jesus finished commanding his twelve disciples, he sent them forth from there, to teach and to make the message known in their cities. 3 But John, hearing about him in prison, sent [a message] by his own disciples 3 and said to him: “Are you [the one] who is going to come, or are we waiting for another?” 4 In answer Jesus said to them: “Go away and tell John [the things] that you are hearing and that you are seeing: 5 The blind see again, and the lame walk, the leprous [lit. skin-diseased] are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, and the dead are being raised, and the poor ones are hearing the gospel made known, 6 and happy is the one that in me finds nothing turning him away.

	7 Íre té oanter, Yésus *yestane carpa i şanganna pa Yoháno: “Mana etelendelde mir i erume cenien? Lisce lévala i súrinen? 9 Lá, mana etelendelde cenien? Nér arwa mussi lannaron? Yé, i arwar mussi lannaron ear coassen araniva! 9 Mal mana castanen etelendelde? Cenie Erutercáno? Ná, quetin lenna, ar ambela Erutercáno! 10 Isse ná i quén pa ye ná técina: 'Yé, inye menta tercánonya epe lye, manwien mallelya epe lye.' 11 Násie quetin lenna: Mici i nar nóne lo nissi, *úquen ná túra epe Yoháno i *Sumbando, mal i ampitya menelo araniesse ná túra epe sé. 12 Mal ho réryar Yoháno i *Sumbando tenna sí, menelo aranie perpere orme, ar i carir orme mapar sa. 13 An ilye i Erutercánor ar i Şanye quenter apaceniltar tenna Yoháno, 14 ar qui merilde came sa, náse Elía ye tulumne. 15 Ye same hlaru, nai hlaruvas!

	7 When they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowd concerning John: “What did you go forth into the desert to see? A sedge moving by the wind? 9 No, what did you go forth to see? A man having soft clothes? Behold, those that have soft clothes are in the houses of kings! 9 But for what reason did you go forth? Seeing a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and far more than a prophet! 10 He is the person of whom [it] is written: “Behold, I send my herald in front of you, in order to prepare your way before you. 11 Truly I say to you: Among [those] that are born by women, no one is greater than John the Baptist, but the smallest in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 12 But from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and those that do violence seize it. 13 For all the prophets and the Law spoke their prophecies until John, 14 and if you wish to receive it, he is Elijah that was going to come. 15 [He] who has ears, may he hear!

	16 As mana sestuvan *nónare sina? Nalte ve híni hámala i mancanómessen, yámala i hyane hínannar: 'Tyaldelme i simpe len, mal ualde liltane; anelme yaimie, mal ualde pente inde nairesse.' 18 An Yoháno túle pen matie hya sucie, ar queni quetir: 'Náse haryana lo rauco!'  19 I Atanyondo túle matila ar sucila, ar queni quetir: 'Ela! Nér antana lapten ar sucien limpe, meldo *tungwemoron ar úcarindoron!' Ananta Sailie anaie tanana faila cardaryainen!” 
	20 Tá *yestanes naitya i ostor yasse i amarimbar túrie cardaryaron martaner, pan loitanelte hire inwis: “Horro lyen, Corasin! Horro lyen, Vet-Saira! An au i túrie cardar yar amartier letse martaner mi Tír hya Síron, andanéya cestanelte inwis mi findilanne ar *litte! 22 Etta quetin lenna: Tíren ar Síronen i Aure Namiéva nauva *cólima epe ya nauvas lent! 23 Ar elye, Capernaum, ma nauval ortana menelenna? Undu Mandostonna tuluval, an au i túrie cardar yar martaner lyesse martaner Soromesse, tana osto tarne tenna aure sina. 24 Etta quetin lenna: Soromo nóren i Aure Namiéva nauva cólima epe ya nauvas len!”     

	16 With what am I to compare this generation? They are like children sitting in the market places [mancanóme = trade-place], crying to the other children: 'We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we were wailing, but you did not beat yourselves in grief.' 18 For John came without eating or drinking, and people say: 'He is possessed by a demon!' 19 The Son of Men came eating and drinking, and people say: 'Look! A man given to gluttony and to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!' And yet Wisdom has been made shown righteous by its deeds!”
	20 Then he began to rebuke [naitya = put to shame] the cities where his most numerous of his mighty deeds happened, since they failed to find repentance: “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty deeds that have happened in you [dual] happened in Tyre or Sidon, long ago they [would have] sought repentance in sackcloth [findilanne = hair-cloth] and ash! 22 Therefore I say to you: To Tyre and Sidon the Day of Judgement will be more bearable than it will be for you [dual]. [Literally: ... will be bearable before (that) which it will be for you.] 23 And you, Capernaum, will you be raised to heaven? Down to Mandos [Greek: Hades] you will come, for if the mighty deeds that happened in you [had] happened in Sodom, that city [would have] stood until this day. 24 Therefore I say to you: To the land of Sodom the day of Judgment will be more bearable than it will be for you!”

	25 Yana lúmesse Yésus ortane ómarya ar quente: “Laitan tye, Átar, Heru or menel cemenye, pan unurtiel nati sine i sailallon ar handallon ar ápantie tai vinimoin! 26 Ná, Átar, an carie sie náne ya fastane tye! 27 Ilye nati nar nin antane lo Atarinya, ar *úquen aqua ista i Yondo hequa i Atar; ente, *úquen aqua ista i Atar hequa i Yondo ar aiquen yen i Yondo mere apanta se. 28 Tula ninna, illi i mótar ar colir lunge cólar, ar antauvan lyen sére! 29 Á panya yaltanya indesse ar para nillo, an nanye moica ar nalda endasse, ar hiruvalde sére fealdain. 30 An yaltanya malda ná, ar cólanya *alalunga!”

	25 At that time Jesus rose his voice and said: “I praise you, Father, Lord over heaven and earth, since you have hid these things from the wise and intelligent, and has revealed them to babes! 26 Yes, Father, for doing so was what pleased you! 27 All things are given to me by my Father, and no one wholly knows the Son except the Father; furthermore, no one wholly knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him. 28 Come to me, all that toil and carry heavy burdens, and I will give you rest! 29 Put my yoke on yourselves and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. 30 For my yoke is gentle, and my burden light.

RANTA 12
Lúme yanasse Yésus lende ter i orirestar i *sendaresse. Hildoryar náner maite ar *yestaner lepta i cari oriva matien. 2 Ar cénala si i Farisar quenter senna: “Ela! Hildolyar carir ya ua lávina care i sendaresse!” 3 Quentes téna: “Ma ualde ehentanie pa ya Lavir carne íre isse ar i neri óse náner maite? 4 Lendes mir i coa Eruva ar mantelte i massar taniéva, yar úner lávina matta sen hya i náner óse, mal rie i *airimoin 5 Hya ualde ehentanie i Şanyesse i mi sendare i *airimor i cordasse racir i sendare ananta nar pen cáma? 6 Mal quetin lenna i sisse ea ya ná túra epe i corda. 7 Mal qui hanyanelde ya quetta sina tea: 'Merin óravie, ar lá *yanca,' ualde namne i nar pen cáma. 8 An i Atanyondo ná Heru i *sendareo!”

CHAPTER 12 
At that time Jesus went through the corn-fields on the day of rest. His disciples were hungry and started to pick heads or grain to eat. 2 And seeing this the Pharisees said to him: “Behold! Your disiciples do what is not alloewd to do on the day of rest!” 3 He said to them: “Have you not read about what David did when he and the men with him were hungry. 4 He went into God's house and ate the breads of showing, which were not allowed food for him or for those that were with him, but for the priests alone? 5 Or have you not read in the Law that on the day of rest the priests in the temple break the sabbath and yet are without guilt? 6 But I say to you that here is [that] which is greater than the temple. 7 But if you understood what this word means: 'I want mercy, and not sacrifice', you did not judge [or, would not judge] those that are without guilt. 8 For the Son of Man is Lord of the day of rest!”

	9 Apa oantes talo túles mir *yomencoalta. 10 Ar yé! enge tasse nér arwa hessa máo. 11 Quentes téna: “Man ná i nér mici te arwa erya mámo ye ua, qui máma sina lanta mir unque i *sendaresse, se-mapuva ar se-ortuva ettenna? 12 Mal manen ambe mirwa epe máma ná atan! Sie ná lávina care márie i *sendaresse!” 13 Tá quentes i nerenna: “Á rahta mályanen!” Ar rahtanes sanen, ar anes envinyanta ar náne ve i hyana má. 14 Mal i Farisar lender ettenna ar carner panoli pa manen nancarumneltes. 

	9 After he went away from there he came into their synagogue. 10 And behold! [there] was there a man having a withered hand. 11 He said to them: “Who is the man among you having a single sheep who does not, if this sheep falls into a hollow on the day of rest, take hold of it and lift it out? 13 But how [much] more precious than a sheep is a man! Thus [it] is allowed to do good on the day of rest!” 12 Then he said to the man: “Reach out with your hand!” And he reached out with it, and it was renewed and was like the other hand. 14 But the Pharisees went outside and made plans about how they were going to destroy him.

	15 Istala ta, Yésus oante talo. Rimbali yú hilyaner se, ar nestanes illi mici te, 16 mal cannes te tulcave i ávalte carumne se sinwa, 17 carien anwa ya náne quétina ter Yesaia i *Erutercáno, ye quente: 
	18 “Yé! Núronya ye ilcílien, meldanya, pa ye feanya ná fastana. Panyuvan fairenya sesse, ar anan caruvas sinwa i nórennar. 19 Uas costuva hya yamuva, ar *úquen hlaruva ómarya i mallessen. 20 Rácina lisce uas ascatuva, ar *yúlala *urulanya uas *luhtyuva, tenna taluvas anan apairenna. 21 Ar esseryasse i nóri panyuvar estelelta!”

	15 Knowing that, Jesus went away from there. Numerous ones also followed him, and he healed all among them, 16 but he commanded them firmly that they were not to make him known, 17 to fulfill [lit. make true] which was said through Isaiah the Prophet, who said: 
	18 “Behold! My servant whom I have chosen, my beloved one, by whom my soul is pleased. I shall put my spirit in him, and justice [or, judgement] he will make known to the nations. 19 He shall not quarrel or cry, and no one will hear his voice on the roads. 20 A broken sedge he shall not crush, and a smouldering wick [urulanya = fire-thread] he shall not extinguish, until he brings justice to victory. 21 And in his name the nations shall put their hope!”

	22 Tá tallelte senna raucoharyaina nér, laceníte ar úpa, ar nestanes se, tyárala i úpa nér carpa ar cene. 23 Ar ilye i şangar náner ara inte elmendanen, ar quentelte: “Cé nér sina ná i Lavirion!” 24 Hlárala ta, i Farisar quenter: “Nér sina ua et-hate i raucor hequa herunen i raucoron, Vélsevuv!” 25 Istala sanweltar, quentes téna: “Ilya aranie şanca insanna ná carna lusta, ar ilya osto ar coa şanca insanna ua taruva. 26 Ar qui Sátan et-hate Sátan, náse şanca insenna; tá manen aranierya taruva? 27 Ente, qui inye et-hate i raucor Vélsevuvnen, mannen yondoldar et-hatir te? Etta té nauvar námoldar. 28 Mal qui Eruo fairenen inye et-hate i raucor, Eruo aranie é utúlie lenna. 29 Hya manen aiquen pole lelya mir i coa polda nerwa ar mapa armaryar, qui uas minyave nute i polda nér? Ar tá piluvas i nati coaryasse. 30 Ye ua asinye ñottonya ná, ar ye ua comya asinye, vinta. 

	22 Then they brought to him a demon-possessed person, blind and dumb, and he healed him, causing the dumb man to talk and see. 23 And all the crowd were beside themselves with wonder, and they said: “Maybe this man is the Son of David!” 24 Hearing that, the Pharisees said: “This man does not throw out the demons except by the lord of the demons, Beelzebub!” 25 Knowing their thoughts, he said to them: “Every kingdom split against itself is made void, and every city and house split against itself will not stand. 26 And if Satan throws out Satan, he is split against himself; then how will his kingdom stand? 27 Furthermore, if I throw out the demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons throw them out? Therefore they will be your judges. 28 But if [it is] by God's spirit I throw out the demons, God's kingdom has indeed come to you. 29 Or how can anyone go into the house of a strong man and take his goods, if he does not firstly bind the strong man? And then he will steal the things in his house. 30 [The one] who is not with me is my enemy, ar [the one] who does not gather with me, scatters.

	31 Etta quetin lenna: Ilya úcare ar naiquetie nauva apsénina Atanin, mal naiquetie i Fairenna ua nauva apsénina. 32 An aiquen ye quete quetta i Atanyondonna, sen nauvas apsénina, mal ye quete i Airefeanna, ta ua nauva apsénina sen, mi randa sina ar i tulila véla. 
	33 Cara i alda mára ar yáverya mára, hya cara i alda quelexa ar yáverya quelexa; an yáveryanen i alda sinwa ná.
	34 Onnar leucoron, manen polilde quete máre nati, elde i nar ulce? An et i endo úvello i anto quete. 35 I mára atan tala máre nati mára harmaryallo, mal i olca nér tala olce nati olca harmaryallo. 36 Quetin lyenna i pa ilya quetie ya atani quetir ya ua aşea, hanquetuvalte Auresse Namiéva, 37 an vére quettalyainen nauval námina faila, ar vére quettalyainen nauval námina ulca!”

	31 Therefore I say to you: Every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven to Men, but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven. 32 For anyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man, to him it will be forgiven, but [as for the one] who speaks against the Holy spirit, that will not be forgiven him, in this age and the coming one alike.
	33 Make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree rotten and its fruit rotten; for by its fruit the tree is known.
	34 Offspring of snakes, how can you say good things, you who are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. 35 The good man brings good things from his good treasure, but the bad [olca, wicked] man brings wicked things from his bad treasure. 36 I say to you that concerning every saying that men say that is not beneficial, they will answer on the Day of Judgement, 37 for by your own words you will be judged [to be] righteous, and by your own words you will be judged evil!”

	38 Tá queneli mici Farisar hanquenter senna: “*Peantar, merilme cene tanwa lyello!” 39 Hanquentasse quentes téna: “Olca ar úvoronda *nónare cestea tanwa, mal tanwa ua nauva antana san, hequa Yóna i Erutercáno tanwa. 40 An tambe Yóna náne i hoa lingwio mityasse auressen nelde ar lómissen nelde, síve i Atanyondo euva cemeno endasse auressen nelde ar lómissen nelde. 41 Neri Ninivello ortuvar i namiesse as *nónare sina ar namuvar sa ulca, an té hirner inwis íre Yóna carne mentarya sinwa, mal ye! sisse ea ya ná túra lá Yóna.
	42 Hyarmeno tári ortuva i namiesse as *nónare sina ar namuva sa ulca, an túles cemeno mettallon hlarien Solomondo sailie, ar yé! sisse ea ya ná túra lá Solomon.

	38 Then some among [the] Pharisees answered him: “Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you!” 39 In answer he said to them: “A wicked and unfaithful generation is seeking a sign, but a sign will not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the Prophet. 40 For like Jonah was in the inward part [mitya, interior] of the big fish for three days and three nights, so the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights. 41 Men from Ninive will arise in the judgement with this generation and will judge it evil, for they found repentance when Jonah made his message known, but behold! here is what is greater than Jonah! 
	42 The queen of the South will rise in the judgment with this generation and will judge it evil, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold! here is what is greater than Solomon. 

	43 Íre úpoica faire ettule nerello, lahtas ter parce nómi cestala nóme séreva, mal uas hire. 44 Tá quetis: “Nanwenuvan coanyanna yallo léven”, ar túlala sanna, hiris i coa lusta, mal poica ar netyana. 45 Tá lelyas oa ar tala as inse hyane fairi otso, olce lá inse, ar apa menie minna marilte tasse, ar tana nero métima sóma ná faica lá i minya! Sie euva yú olca *nónare sinan!”
	46 Íre en quétanes i şangannar, yé! amillerya ar hánoryar tarner i ettesse ar merner carpa óse. 47 Ar quén quente senna: “Yé! Amillelya ar hánolyar tárar i ettesse, mérala carpa aselye!” 48 Hanquentasse quentes yenna carampe senna: “Man ná amillinya, ar man nar hánonyar?” 49 Ar rahtala máryanen hildoryannar quentes: “Ela amillinya ar hánonyar! 50 Aiquen ye care i indóme Atarinyo ye ea menelde, isse ná hánonya ar néşanya ar amillinya!”

	43 When an unclean spirit comes out from a man, it passes through dry places seeking a place of rest, but it does not find [any]. 44 Then it says: “I will return to my house from which I moved,” and coming to it, it finds the house empty, but clean and adorned. 45 Then it goes away and brings with itself seven other spirits, more wicked than itself, and after going inside they dwell there, and that man's final state is worse than the first! So it will be also for this wicked generation!”
	46 As he was still speaking to the crowds, look! his mother and his brothers stood on the outside and wished to speak with him. 47 And someone said to him: “Behold! Your mother and your brothers are standing on the outside, wishing to speak with you!” 48 In answer he said to [the one] who spoke to him: “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?” 49 And reaching out with his hand towards his disciples he said: “Behold my mother and my brothers! 50 Anyone who does the will of my father who is in heaven, he is my brother and sister and mother!”

RANTA 13
Aure yanasse Yésus, apa lendes i coallo, hámane ara i ear, 2 ar hoe şangali ócomner senna. Etta lendes mir lunte ar hamune, íre i quanda şanga tárane i fárasse. 3 Tá quentes téna rimbe natali sestielissen, quétala: “Yé! *Rerindo lende ettenna rerien. 4 Rerieryasse erdeli lantaner ara i malle, ar i aiwi túler ar manter tai. 5 Exeli lantaner i ondonna, yasse ualte sáme núra cemen, ar orontelte lintiénen, peniénen núra cemen. 6 Mal íre Anar oronte, anelte urtane, ar peniénen şundo hestanelte. 7 Exeli lantaner imíca i neceli, ar i neceli túler ama ar quorner te. 8 Mal exeli lantaner i mára cemenna ar carner yáve – mine, napánine lestali tuxa, exe, *enenquean, exe, *nelequean. 9 Ye same hlaru, nai sé hlára!”

CHAPTER 13
On that day Jesus, after he went from the house, was sitting beside the sea, 2 and great crowds gathered to him. Therefore he went into a boat and sat down, while the entire crowd was standing on the beach. 3 Then he spoke to them many things in comparisons, saying: “Look! A sower went out to sow. 4 As he was sowing [lit. in his sowing] some seems fell beside the road, and the birds came and ate them. 5 Others fell upon the rock, where they did not have deep soil, and they came up quickly, for lacking deep soil. 6 But when the Sun came up, they were scorched, and for lacking root they withered. 7 Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and quoked them. 8 But others fell upon the good soil and made fruit – one, a hundred added measures, another, sixty, another, thirty. 9 Who has ears, may he be hearing!

	10 Ar i hildor túler senna ar quenter: “Mana castalya carpien téna sestiessen?” 11 Hanquentasse quentes: “Len ná antana hanya menelo araniéno fóler, mal sane quenin uas antana. 12 An ye same, amba nauva sen antana, ar camuvas úve – mal ye ua same, yando ya samis nauva mapana sello. 13 Etta carpan téna sestiessen, pan yétala ualte cenuva, ar hlárala ualte tuntuva hya hanyuva, 14 ar pa té Yesaio apacen ná carna nanwa: 'Hlariénen hlaruvalde, mal ualde hanya, ar yétiénen yétuvalde, mal ualde cene. 15 An lie sino enda anaie carna tiuca, ar hlarultanten hlarilte ú hanquento, ar oholtielte hendultat; sie ualte oi cenuva hendultanten hya hlaruva hlarultanten ar hanyuva endaltanen ar hiruva inwis, nestienyan te!”
	16 Mal valime nát henduldat, an yétatte, ar hlaruldat, an hlaritte. 17 An násie quetin lenna: Rimbe *Erutercánoli ar failali merner cene yar elde yétar, mal ualte cenner tai, ar hlare i nati yar elde hlarir, mal ualte hlasse tai.

	10 And the disciples came to him and said: “What is your reason for speaking to them in comparisons?” 11 In reply he said: “To you it is given to understand the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to those people it is not given. 12 For who has, more will be given to him, and he shall receive abundance – but who does not have, also what he has will be taken from him. 13 Therefore I speak to them in comparisons, since looking they will not see, and hearing they will not perceive or understand, 14 and concerning them Isaiah's prophecy is made true: 'By hearing they will hear, but they do not understand, and by looking they will look, but they will not see. 15 For this people's heart has been made fat, and with their ears they hear without reply, and they have shut their eyes; thus they will not ever see with their eyes or hear with their ears and understand with their heart and find repentence, for me to heal them!”
	16 But happy are your eyes, for they look, and your ears, for they hear. 17 And truly I say to you: Numerous prophets and righteous one wanted to see [the things] that you are looking at, but they did not see them, and hear the things that you hear, but they did not hear them.

	18 Etta, elde hlara i sestie pa i *rerindo: 19 Íre aiquen hlare i quetta i araniéno mal ua hanya sa, i Olca tule ar rapa oa ya anaie rérina endaryasse; si ná ye náne rérina ara i malle. 20 Ar ye náne rérina i ondosse, ta ná ye hlare i quetta ar came sa mi alasse. 21 Ananta uas same şundo insesse mal lemya ter lúme, mal íre şangie hya roitie marta i quettanen, lantas oa mi imya lú. 22 Ar ye náne rérina imíca i neceli, si ná ye hlára i quetta, mal randa sino quáreler ar i laro úsahtie quorir i quetta, ar náse ú yáveo. 
	23 Ar ye náne rérina i mára cemende, si ná ye hlára i quetta ar hanya sa, ye é cole yáve ar care napánine lestali – quén sina, tuxa, exe, *enenquean, exe, *nelequean!”

	18 Therefore, you hear [imperative!] the comparison about the sower: 19 When anyone hears the word of the kingdom but does not understand it, the Wicked One comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart; this is [that] which was sown by the road. 20 And [the one] that was sown upon the rock, that is [the one] who hears the word and receives it in joy. 21 And yet he does not have [any] root in himself but remains for a time, but when tribulation or persecution happens because of the word, he falls away in the same moment. 22 And [the one] that was sown among the thorns, this is [the one] who is hearing the word, but the concerns of this age and the temptation of riches choke the word, and it is without fruit.
	23 And [the one] who was sown on the good earth, this is [the one] who is hearing the word and understands it, who indeed bears fruit and makes added measures – this person, a hundred, another, sixty, another, thirty.

	24 Hyana sestie panyanes epe te, quétala: “Menelo aranie ná ve nér ye rende mára erde restaryasse. 25 Íre queni náner lorne, ñottorya túle ar rende úmirwe olvali imíca i ore, are oante. 26 Íre i lasse tuiane ar carne yáve, tá yando i úmirwe olvar túler ama. 27 Etta i *coanturo móli túler ar quenter senna: “Heru, ma ualye rende mára erde restalyasse? Mallo samis úmirwe olvali?” 28 Quentes téna: “Ñotto, nér, acárie nat sina!” Quentelte senna: “Ma meril i menuvalme comien te?” 29 Eques: “Vá; hya cé tucuvalde ama yando i ore as i úmirwe olvar. 30 Lava yúyon ale tenna i yávie, ar íre i yávie tuluva, quetuvan innar *cirihtuvar: Minyave á comya i úmirwe olvar ar nuta te mir loxi náven urtaine; tá mena comien i ore mir hauranya!”

	24 Another comparison he put before them, saying: “The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field. 25 When people were asleep, his enemy came and sowed worthless plants among the grain, and went away. 26 When the leaf sprouted and made fruit, then also the worthless plants came up. 27 Therefore the householder's slaves came and said to him: “Lord, did you not sow good seed in your field? From where does it have worthless plants?” 28 He said to them: “An enemy, a man, has done this thing!” They said to him: “Do you want that we will go [= do you wish us to go] to gather them?” 29 He said: “No; or maybe you will pull up the grain with the worthless plants. 30 Let both grow until the harvest, and when the harvest shall come, I will say to the ones that will reap: First gather the worthless plants and bind them into bunches to be burnt; then go to gather the grain into my barn!”

	31 Hyana sestie panyanes epe te, quétala: “Menelo aranie ná ve erde *sinapio, ya nér nampe ar empanne restaryasse. 32 Ta ná i ampitya ilye erdion, mal álienwa náse i anhoa i quearon ar anaie carna alda, ar sie menelo aiwi tulir ar hirir sére olvaryassen!”
	33 Hyana sestie quentes téna: “Menelo aranie ná ve *pulmaxe, ya nís nampe ar nurtane hoe lestassen nelde moleva, tenna ilqua náne ortaina!”
	34 Ilye sine nati Yésus quente i şangannar sestiessen, ar ú sestiéno uas carampe téna, 35 carien nanwa ya náne quétina ter i Erutercáno ye quente. “Pantuvan antonya sestielissen; caruvan sinwe natali nurtane i tulciello!”

	Another comparison he put before them, saying: “The kingdom of heaven is like a seed of mustard, which a man took and planted in his field. 32 That is the smallest of all seeds, but having grown it is the biggest of the vegetables and has been made a tree, and so heaven's birds came and find rest in its branches!”
	33 Another comparison he said to them: “The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three big measures of flour, until everything was raised!”
	34 All these things Jesus said to the crowds in comparisons, and without a comparison he did not speak to them, 35 to make true [that] which was said through the Prophet who said: “I will open my mouth in comparisons; I will make known things hidden from the foundation!”

	36 Tá, apa mentie i şangar oa, lendes mir i coa. Ar hildoryar túler senna ar quenter: “Lava men hanya i sestie pa i úmirwe olvar i restasse!” 37 Hanquentasse eques: “Ye rere i mára erde ná i Atanyondo; 38 i resta ná i mar, ar i mára erde, té nar i araniéno yondor, mal i úmirwe olvar nar i Olco yondor. 39 I ñotto ye rende te ná i Arauco. I yávie ná i rando tyel, i *cirihtor nar vali. 40 Etta, ve íre i úmirwe olvar nar comyaine ar urtaine nárenen, sie euva i rando tyelde: 41 I Atanyondo mentuva valaryar, ar comyuvalte et aranieryallo ilye nati yar tyarir queni lanta ar i queni i racir i şanye, 42 ar hatuvaltet mir i urna náreva. Tasse euvar nieltar ar mulielta nelciva. 43 Tá i failar caltuvar ve Anar, Atarelto araniesse. Ye same hlaru, nai hláras!

	36 Then, after sending the crowds away, he went into the boat. And his disciples came to him and said: “Let us understand the comparison about the worthless plants in the field!” 37 In answer he said: “[The one] who sows the good seed is the Son of Man; 38 the field is the world, and the good seed, they are the sons of the kingdom, but the worthless plands are the sons of the Wicked One. 39 The enemy who sowed them is the Devil. The harvest is the end of the age, the reapers are angels. 40 Therefore, as when the worthless plants are gathered and burnt by fire, so it will be at the conclusion of the age: 42 The Son of Man will send his angles, and they will gather out of his kingdom all things that cause people to fall and the people that break the law, 42 and they will thrown them into the oven of fire. There will be their tears and their grinding of teeth. 43 Then the righteous ones will shine like the Sun, in their Father's kingdom. [The one] who has hears, let him be hearing!

	44 Menelo aranie ná ve harma nurtana i restasse, ya nér hirne ar nurtane, ar alasseryanen autas ar vace i nati yar samis, ar mancas insen resta tana.
	45 Ata menelo aranie ná ve macar cestala máre marillar: 46 Apa hirie er marilla ya náne ammirwa, oantes ar vance ilqua ya sámes ar mancane sa insen. 
	47 Ata menelo aranie ná ve rembe, hátina mir i ear ar comyala lingwili ilya nostaleo. 48 Íre anes quanta, tunceltes ama i fáranna ar hamuner ar comyaner i márar mir veneli, mal i úmirwar hantelte oa. 49 Sie euva mí rando tyel: I vali etelelyuvar ar hyamuvar i olcar i failallon, 50 ar hatuvaltet mir i uruite urna. Tasse euvar nieltar ar mulielta nelciva. 
	51 Ma hanyanelde ilye sine nati?” Quentelte senna: “Ná!” 52 Tá quentes téna: “Etta ilya parmangolmo, peantana pa menelo aranie, ná ve nér, *coantur, ye tala et harmaryallo vinyali ar yárali!” 

	44 The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man found and hid, and for [-nen] his joy he goes away and sells the things that he has, and trades to himself that field.
	45 Again the kingdom of heaven is like a tradesman seeking good pearls: 46 After finding one pearl that was most precious, he went away and sold everything that he had and traded it to himself.
	47 Again the kingdom of heaven is like a net, thrown into the sea and gathering fishes of every kind. 48 When it was full, they pulled it up onto the beach and sat down and gathered the good ones into vessels, but the worthless ones they threw away. 49 Thus it will be at the conclusion of the age: The angels will go forth and will separate the wicked from the righteous, 50 and they will throw them into the fiery oven. There will be their tears and their grinding of teeth.
	51 Do you understand all these things?” They said to him: “Yes!” 52 Then he said to them: “Therefore every scribe, instructed about the kingdom of heaven, is like a man, a householder, who brings out from his treasure things new and old!”

	53 Ar tá, apa Yésus telyane sestier sine, lahtanes nóre talo. 54 Ar íre túles vehteryanna, peantanes tien *yomencoaltasse. Sie anelte quátine elmendanen ar quenter: “Mallo nér sina camne sailie sina ar i taure cardar sine? 55 Ma si ua i tautamo yondo? Ma amillerya ua estaina María, ar hánoryar Yácov ar Yósef ar Símon ar Yúra? 56 Ar néşaryar, ma ualte illi aselve? Masse, tá, nér sina camne ilye sine nati?” 57 Etta anelte rúşie senna. Mal Yésus quente téna: “Erutercáno ua pene laitie hequa vehteryasse ar coaryasse!” 58 Ar uas carne tasse rimbe taure cardali, pan pennelte savie.

53 And then, after Jesus completed these comparisons, he crossed land from there. 54 And when he came to his home territory, he instructed them in their synagogue. Thus they were filled with wonder and said: “From where did this man receive this wisdom and these mighty deeds? 55 Is this not the carpenter's son? Is his mother not Mary, and his brothers Jacob and Joseph and Simon and Juda? 56 And his sisters, are they not all with us? Where, then, did this man receive all these things?” 57 Therefore they were angry with [-nna, against] him. But Jesus said to them: “A prophet does not lack honor except in his home territory and in his house!” 58 And he did not do numerous mighty deeds there, since they lacked faith.

RANTA 14
Lúme yanasse Herol i *Canastatur hlasse i nyarna pa Yésus, 2 ar quentes núroryannar: “Si ná Yoháno i *Sumbando. Anaies ortana qualinallor, ar etta i taure cardar martar sénen!” 3 An Herol yá nampe Yohannes ar nunte se ar se-panyane mandosse, castanen Heroliasso, Filip hánoryo veri. 4 An Yohannes quente senna: “Ualye lerta same se!” 5 Mal ómu mernes nahta se, runces i şangallo, an sannes pa se ve Erutercáno. 

CHAPTER 14
At that time Herod the Farthing-ruler heard the story about Jesus, 2 and he said to his servants: “This is John the Baptist. He has been raised from the dead, and therefore the mighty deeds happen by him!” 3 For Herod formerly took John and bound him and put him in jail, by reason of Herodias, the wife of Filip his brother. 4 For John said to him: “You are not allowed to have her!” 5 But though he wanted to kill him, he feared the crowd, for they thought about him as a prophet.

	6 Man íre anelte merye Herolo *nónaresse, Heroliasso selye liltane sasse ar antane Herolen alasse ta hoa 7 i quentes hén vanda: Antauvanes hén *aiqua ya arcumnes. 8 Tá, peantaina lo amillerya, hé quente: “Ánin anta sisse venesse Yoháno i *Sumbando cas!” 9 Ómu ta tyarne sen naire, i aran canne i mo antauvane sa i venden, 10 ar mentanes ar hocirne Yoháno cas i mandosse. 11 Ar carya náne talana venesse ar antana i venden, ar hé talle sa amilleryanna. 12 Ar hildoryar túler ar namper oa i loico ar taller se sapsanna, ar túlelte ar nyarner Yésun.

	6 But when they were festive on Herod's birthday, Herodias' daughter danced on it and gave Herod a joy so great 7 that he spoke a promise to her: He was going to give her anything that she was going to request. 8 Then, instructed by her mother, she said: “Give me here on a plate John the Baptist's head!” 9 Though that caused him grief, the king commanded that one was to give it to the maiden, 10 and he sent and cut off John's head in the prison. 11 And his head was brought on a platter and given to the maiden, and she brought it to her mother. 12 And his disciples came and took away the corpse and brought him to a grave, and they came and told Jesus.

	13 Ire hlasses sa, Yésus lende oa talo luntesse, eressea nómenna, náven erinqua; mal i şangar hlasser sa ar hilyaner se talunen i ostollon.
	14 Ar íre túles cennes hoa şanga, ar endarya etelende téna, ar nestanes hlaiwaltar. 15 Mal íre şinye lantane, hildoryar túler senna ar quenter: “I nóme eressea ná, ar i lúme ná telwa yando sí; á menta i şangar oa, menieltan mir i mastor mancien inten matta!” 16 Mal Yésus quente téna: “Ualte same maure autiéva. Elde áten anta matta matien!” 17 Quentelte senna: “Samilme munta sisse hequa massar lempe ar lingwe atta!” 18 Eques: “Á tala tai sir ninna!” 19 Tá cannes i şangar i caitumnelte undu i salquenna, ar nampes i massar lempe ar lingwe atta, ar yétala ama menelenna quentes aistie. Ar apa racie i massar etsanteset i hildoin, ar i hildor i şangain. 20 Ar illi manter ar náner quátine, ar ortanelte i lemyala rantar: quante *vircolcar yunque. 21 Mal i manter náner *os neri húmi lempe, hequa i nissi ar híni.

	13 When he heard it, Jesus went away from there in a boat, to a lonely place, to be alone; but the crowds heard it and followed him on foot [talunen = by feet, dual] from the cities.
	14 And when he came he saw a huge crowd, and his heart went out to them, and he healed their sick ones. 15 But when evening fell, his diciples came to him and said: “The place is lonely, and the hour is late even now; send the crowds away, for them to to into the villages to trade to themselves food!” 16 But Jesus said to them: “They do not have [any] need of going away. You give them food to eat!” 17 They said to him: “We have nothing here except five breads and two fishes!” 18 He said: “Bring them here to me!” 19 Then he commanded the crowds that they were to lie down upon the grass, and he took the five breads and two fishes, and looking up towards heaven he spoke a blessing. And after breaking the breads he distributed them to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds. 20 And all ate and were filled, and they took up the remaining pieces: twelve baskets full. 20 But those who ate were around five thousand men, except for the women and children.

	22 Tá, lintiénen, mauyanes hildoryar mene mir i lunte ar lelya epe se i hyana fáranna, íre mentanes i şangar oa. 
	23 Ar apa mentanes i şangar oa, lendes ama mir i oron eressea nómenna, hyamien. Íre şinye túle, anes erinqua tasse. 24 Sí i lunte náne rangar rimbe tuxali norello, ñwalyaina i falmainen, an sámelte i súre cendeleltanna. 25 Mal mí cantea tirisse i lómio túles téna, vantala i earesse. 26 Íre cenneltes, anelte *tarastaine, quétala: “Ta auşa ná!” Ar caureltanen yámelte. 27 Mal mi imya lú Yésus quente téna: “Huore! Inye ná! Áva ruce!” 28 Péter hanquente senna: “Heru, qui ta elye ná, ánin cane i tuluvan lyenna olla i neni!” 29 Eques: “Tula!”

	22 Then, quickly, he compelled his disiples to go into the boat and go before him to the other shore, while he sent the crowds away.
	23 And after he sent the crowds away, he went up into the mountain to a lonely place, to pray. When evening came, he was alone there.  24 Now the boat was many hundred yards from land, being tormented by the waves, for they had the wind to their face. 25 But in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea. 26 When they saw him, they were being troubled, saying: “That is a ghost!” And for [-nen] their fear they cried [out]. 27 But in the same moment Jesus said to them: “Courage! It is I! Do not be afraid!” 28 Peter answered him: “Lord, if that is you, command me that I am to come to you across the waters!” 29 He said: “Come!” 

	Tá Péter, autala i luntello, vantane olla i neni ar túle Yésunna. 30 Mal íre cennes i raumo, anes ruhtaina, ar íre i nén *yestane *hlucitas, yámes: “Heru, áni rehta!” 31 Mi imya lú Yésus rahtane máryanen ar nampe se, ar quentes senna: “Nér pitya saviéno, manen ná i savielya náne iltanca?” 32 Ar apa lendette mir i lunte, i raumo pustane. 33 Tá i queni i luntesse luhtaner epe se, quétala: “Nanwave nalye Eruo Yondo!” Ar lahtanelte ar túler norenna mi Ennesaret.
	35 Íre i neri tana nómesse cenner man anes, mentanelte mir i quanda pelila nórie, ar queni taller senna illi i náner hlaiwe. 36 Ar arcanelte senna i rie appumnelte collaryo lane, ar illi i appaner sa camner quanta mále.

	Then Peter, going away from the boat, walked across the waters and came to Jesus. 30 But when he saw the storm, he was terrified, and when the water started to swallow him, he cried: “Lord, save me!” 31 In the same moment Jesus reached out with his hand and seized him, and he said to him: “Man of little faith, how is [it] that your faith was unsteady?” 32 And after they [dual] went into the boat, the storm ceased. 33 Then the people in the boat bowed before him, saying: “Truly you are God's Son!” And they crossed over and came to land in Gennesaret.
	35 When the men of that place saw who he was, they sent [messengers] into the entire surrounding country, and people brought to him all that were sick. 36 And they prayed to him that they might only touch the rim of his cloak, and all that touched it received full health.

RANTA 15
Tá túler Yésunna Yerúsalemello Farisali ar parmangolmoli, quétala: 2 “Manen ná i hildolyar racir i haime cámina i amyárallon? An ualte sove máltat nó matilte matta!”
	3 Hanquentasse quentes téna: “Manen ná i elde racir Eruo axan haimeldanen? 4 An Eru quente: 'Á anta alcar atarelyan yo amillelyan,' ar: 'Aiquen ye quete ulco pa atar hya amil, é qualuva.' 5 Mal elde quetir: 'Aiquen ye quete ataryanna hya amilleryanna: '*Aiqua aşea ya camumnetye nillo, ná anna Erun' – 6 mauya sen i aqua uas anta alcar ataryan hya amilleryan. 7 *Imnatyandoli, Yesaia quente mai ve Erutercáno pa le, íre quentes: Lie sina nin-anta alcar péltanten, mal endalta ná haira nillo. 9 Cumnave *tyerilte ni, peantala Atanion peantier!”

CHAPTER 15
Then [there] came to Jesus from Jerusalem some Pharisees and scribes, saying: 2 “How is [it] that your disciples break the custom received from the elders? For they do not wash their hands before they eat food!”
	3 In answer he said to them: “How is [it] that you break God's command because of [-nen] your custom? 4 For God said: 'Give glory to your father and to your mother', and: 'Anyone who speaks evil about father or mother, will without fail [é = indeed] die.' 5 But you say: 'Anyone who says to his father or to his mother: 'Anything useful that you were to receive from me, is a gift to God ' – 6 it is necessary for him that he does not give glory to his father or to his mother at all. 7 Hypocrites, Isaiah spoke well as a prophet concerning you, when he said: This people give me glory with their lips [-nten, dual instrumental], but their heart is far from me. 9 Emptily [= in vain] they worship me, teaching Men's teachings!”

	10 Ar tultanes i şanga ar quente téna: “Á lasta ar hanya! 11 Lá ya tule minna ter queno anto vahta atan, mal ya ettule antoryallo ná ya vahta atan!”
	12 Tá i hildor túler ar quenter senna: “Ma istal in íre i Farisar hlasser i quetta, anelte rúşie?” 13 Hanquentasse quentes: “Ilya olva ye meneldea Atarinya ua empanne, nauva túcina ama as şunduryar. 14 Lava tien náve! Laceníti *tulyandoli nalte. Mal qui laceníte quén tulya laceníte quén, yúyo lantuvat mir sapta!” 15 Hanquentasse Péter quente senna: “Ámen anta tercen pa i sestie!” 16 Tá quentes: “Ma yú elde loitar hanya? 17 Ma ualde ista in ilqua ya tule minna ter i anto, mene mir i hirdi ar auta mir i *aucelie? 18 Mal yar ettulir i antollo ettulir i endallo, ar tai vahtar atan. 19 An et i endallo tulir olce sanwar, nahtier, vestaleracie, *úpuhtale, pilwi, húrala *vettier, naiquetier. 20 Tai nar yar vahtar atan, mal qui atan mate matta úsóvine mánten, ta ua vahta se!”

	10 And he summoned the crowd and said to them: “Listen and understand! 11 [It is] not [that] which comes inside through a person's mouth [that] soils a man, but [that] which comes out from his mouth is [that] which soils a man.
	12 Then the disciples came and said to him: “Do you know that when the Pharisees heard the word, they were angry?” 13 In answer he said: “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant, will be pulled up with its roots. 14 Let them be! Blind leavers they are. But if a blind person leads a blind person, both will fall [dual] into a pit!” 15 In answer Peter said to him: “Give us insight about the comparison!” 16 Then he said: “Do you as well fail to understand? 17 Do you know know that [that] which comes in through the mouth, goes into the entrails and passes into the sewer? [Aucelie = away-flowing.] 18 But what comes out from the mouth come out from the heart, and they soil a man!” 19 And out of the heart come evil thoughts, killings, marriage-breaking, fornication, thefts, lying testimonies, blasphemies. 20 They are [the things] that soil a man, but if a man eats food with unwashed hands, that does not soil him!”

	21 Autala talo, Yésus sí lende oa mir i ménar Tíro ar Sírono. 22 Ar yé! Canáanya nís ente nóriellon ettúle ar yáme, quétala: “Órava nisse, Lavirion! Selyenya ná ulcave haryana lo rauco!”  23 Mal isse ua hanquente senna quetta. Ar hildoryar túler senna ar arcaner senna, quétala: “Áse menta oa, an yámas ca vi!” 24 Hanquentasse eques: “Únen mentana aiquenna hequa i vanwe mámannar Israélo coallo!” 25 Íre i nís túle, luhtanes epe se, quétala: “Heru, áni manya!” 26 Hanquentasse quentes: “Ua vanima mapie i hínion massa ar hatie sa i huonnar!” 27 Hé quente: “Ná, Heru, mal i huor matir i mier yar lantar sarnollo herultaiva!” 28 Tá Yésus hanquente senna: “A nís, savielya túra ná; nai martuva lyen ve asáviel!” Ar i selye náne nestana lúme yanallo.

	21 Passing from there, Jesus now went away into the regions of Tyre and Sidon. 22 And behold! a Canaanite woman from those countries came out and cried, saying: “Have mercy on me, Son of David! My daughter is badly possessed by a demon!” 23 But he did not answer her a word. And his disciples came to him and petitioned of him, saying: “Send her away, for she is crying behind us!” 24 In answer he said: “I was not sent to anyone except to the lost sheep from the house of Israel!” 25 When the woman came, she bowed before him, saying: “Lord, help me!” 26 In answer he said: “It is not proper, taking the children's bread and throwing it to the dogs!” 27 She said: “Yes, Lord, but the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from the table of their lords [or, masters]!” 28 Then Jesus answered her: “O woman, your faith is great; may it happen to you as you have believed!” And the daughter was healed from that hour.

	29 Lahtala nórie talo, Yésus túre hare i Earenna Alileo, ar apa menie ama mir oron hamunes tasse. 30 Tá hoe şangali túler senna, túlula queneli i náner *úlévime, tapte, lalevíte, úpe, ar nimpe rimbe hyane lélissen, 31 ar sie i şanga náne quanta elmendanen íre cennelte i úpar quéta ar i *úlévimar vantea ar i lalevíti céna, ar antanelte alcar Israélo Ainon. 
	32 Mal Yésus tultane hildoryar insenna ar quente: “Endanya etelelya i şanganna, an sí elémielte asinye auressen nelde, ar samilte munta matien; ar uan mere menta te oa ú matiéno. Cé nauvalte acca lumbe i mallesse!” 33 Mal hildoryar quenter senna: “Mallo, mi eressea nóme sina, ñetuvalme fárea massa şangan ya ta hoa ná?” 

	29 Crossing country from there, Jesus came near to the Sea of Galilee, and after going up into a mountain he sat down there. 30 Then great crowds came to him, bringing some that were lame, maimed [tapte: impeded], blind, dumb, and ailing in many other ways, 31 and so the crowd was full of wonder when they saw the dumb ones speak or the lame walk and the blind see, and they gave glory to the God of Israel.
	32 But Jesus summoned his disciples to himself and said: “My heart goes out to the crowd, for now they have remained with me for three days, and they have nothing to eat; and I do not want to send them away without eating. Maybe they will be too tired on the road!” 33 But his disciples said to him: “From where, in this lonely place, are we to get sufficient bread for a crowd that is so big?”

	34 Ar Yésus quente téna: “Mana nóte massaron samilde?” Quentelte: “Otso, ar nótime lingwili!” 35 Tá, apa cannes i şangan i caitumnelte i talamesse, 36 nampes i matsar otso ar, apa antave hantale, rance tai ar etsante tai i hildoin, ar i hildor i şangain. 37 Ar illi manter ar náner quátine, ar comyanelte i lemyala rantar: quante *vircolcar otso. 38 Ananta i manter náner neri húmi canta, hequa i nissi ar híni. 39 Ar apa mentave i şangar oa, lendes mir i lunte ar túle i ménannar Maharáno.

	34 And Jesus said to them: “What number of breads do you have?” They said: “Seven, and a few fishes!” 35 Then, after he commanded the crowd that they were to lie down on the ground, 36 he took the seven breads and, after giving thanks, he broke them and distributed them to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds. 37 And all ate and were filled, and they gathered the remaining pieces: seven full baskets. 38 And yet those who ate were four thousand men, except for the women and children. 39 And after sending the crowds away, he went into the boat and came to the regions of Magadan. 


RANTA 16 
Ar i Farisar ar Sandúcear túler senna, ar tyastien se arcanelte sello i tanumnes tien tanwa menello. 2 Hanquentasse quentes téna: [3] 4 “Ulca ar úvoronda *nónare cestea tanwa, mal tanwa ua nauva antaina san, hequa Yóno tanwa!” Ar oantes tello ar lende oa.
	5 Sí i hildor lahtaner i hyana fáranna, ar ualte *renne tala massa. 6 Yésus quente téna: “Cima ar ettira pa i *pulmaxe Farisaron ar Sandúcearon!” 7 Carampelte pa si mici inte, quétala: “Ualve talle massar!” 8 Istala ta, Yésus quente: “Manen ná i carpalde mici inde pa penie massar? 9 Ma en ualde hanya, ar ualde enyale i massar lempe i húmin lempe, ar i nóte *vircolcaron yar ortanelde? 10 Hya i massar otso i húmin canta, ar i nóte *vircolcaron yar ortanelde? 11 Manen, tá, ualde hanya i uan quente lenna pa massar? Mal *ettira pa i *pulmaxe Farisaron ar Sandúcearon!” 12 Tá hanyanelte i quentes téna i *ettirumnelte, lá pa i *pulmaxe massaron, mal pa i peantie Farisaron ar Sandúcearon.

CHAPTER 16
And the Pharisees and Sadducees came to him, and to test him they asked of him that he would show them a sign from heaven. 2 In answer he said to them: [3] 4 “An evil and unfaithful generation is seeking a sign, but a sign will not be given them, except Jonah's sign!” And he went off from them and went away.
	5 Now the disciples crossed over to the other side, and they did not remember to bring bread. 6 Jesus said to them: “Take heed and watch out concerning the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees!” 7 They spoke about this among themselves, saying: “We did not bring breads!” 8 Knowing that, Jesus said: “How is it that you speak among yourselves about lacking breads? 9 Do you still not understand, and do you not recall the five breads for the five thousand, and the number of baskets that you took up? 10 Or the seven breads for the four thousand, and the number of baskets that you took up? 11 How, then, is [it] you do not understand that I did not speak to you about breads? But watch out concerning the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees!” 12 Then they understood that he said to them that they were to watch out, not concerning the leaven of breads, but concerning the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

	13 Apa Yésus túle i ménannar Cesaréa Filippio, maquentes hildoryannar: “Man queni quetir in i Atanyondo ná?” 14 Quentelte: “Queneli quetir: Yohannes i *Sumbando, exeli: Elía, exeli: Yeremía hya quén i Erutercánoron!” 15 Quentes téna: “Mal elde, man quetilde i nanye?” 16 Hanquentasse Péter quente senna: “Elye i Hristo ná, i coirea Aino yondo!” 17 Yésus hanquente senna: “Valima nalye, Símon Var-Yóna, an hráve yo serce uat apantane sa lyen, mal meneldea Atarinya. 18 Ar quetin lyenna: Elye Péter, ar ondo sinasse carastuvan ocombenya, ar Mandosto andor uar turúva sa. 19 Antauvan lyen menelo araniéno *latili, ar ilqua ya nutuvalde cemende nauva nútina menelde, ar ilqua ya lehtal cemende nauva lehtaina menelde!”

	13 After Jesus came to the regions of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples: “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?” 14 They said: “People say: John the Baptist, others: Eliah, others: Jeremiah or one of the Prophets. 15 He said to them: “But you, who do you say that I am?” 16 In answer Peter said to him: “You are the Christ, the son of the living God!” 17 Jesus answered him: “Happy you are, Simon Bar-Jonah, for flesh and blood did not [dual] reveal it to you, but my heavenly Father. 18 And I say to you: You [are] Peter, and on this rock I will build my congregation, and the gates of Mandos [/Hades] will not overpower it. 19 I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and everything that you will bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and everything that you loose on earth will be loosened in heaven!”

	20 Tá tulcave cannes i hildoin i ávalte quetumne aiquenna in anes i Hristo.
	21 Lúme yanallo Yésus *yestane tana hildoryain i mauyane sen lelya Yerúsalemenna ar perpere rimbe natali ho i *amyárar ar parmangolmor, ar náve nahtana, ar i nelya auresse náve ortana. 22 Mal Péter talle se arana ar *yestane carpa tulcave senna, quétala: “Na moica imlen, Heru! Sie laume euva elyen!” 23 Mal sé quernexe ar quente Péterenna: “Heca ca ni, Sátan! Meril tyare ni lanta, an sanal, lá Eruo sanwi, mal tai atanion!”
	24 Tá Yésus quente hildoryannar: “Qui aiquen mere tule apa ni, nai laluvas inse ar ortauva tarwerya ar hilyuva ni.

	20 Then he firmly commanded the disciples that they were not going to say to anyone that he was the Christ. 
	21 Then from that time Jesus began to show to his disciples that it was necessary for him to go to Jerusalem and to suffer many things from the elders and scribes, and to be slain, and on the third day to be raised. 22 But Peter brought him aside [ara-na] and started to speak firmly to him, saying: “Be kind [moica = gentle] to yourself, Lord! It will by no means be so to you!” 23 But he turned and said to Peter: “Begone behind me, Satan! You want to cause me to fall, for you think, not God's thoughts, but those of men!” 
	24 Then Jesus said to his disciples: “If anyone wishes to come after me, may he deny himself and lift up his cross and follow me.

	25 An aiquen ye mere rehta cuilerya, sen nauvas vanwa; mal aiquen yeo cuile ná vanwa márienyan, hiruva sa. 26 An qui atan came i quanda mar, mal cuilerya ná vanwa, manen ta ná sen aşea? 27 An i Atanyondo tuluva Ataryo alcaresse as valaryar, ar tá paityuvas ilquenen ve lengierya. 28 Násie quetin lenna in ear queneli i tárar sisse i laume tyavuvar qualme nó cenilte i Atanyondo túla aranieryasse!”

	25 For anyone who desires to save his life, to him it will be lost; but anyone whose life is lost for my sake [lit. my good], will find it. 26 For if a man receives the whole world, but his life is lost, how is that beneficial to him? 27 For the Son of Man will come in his Father's glory with his angels, and then he will reward everyone according to his behavior. 28 Truly I say to you that there are some people that are standing here that by no means will taste death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom!”

RANTA 17
Auri enque epeta Yésus talle Péter ar Yácov ar Yohannes hánorya, ar tulyane te ama mir tára oron, té erinque. 2 Ar anes vistana epe te, ar cendelerya caltane ve Anar, ar lanneryar náner alcarinque ve cala. 3 Ar yé! Móses ar Elía tanner intu tien, quétala óse. 4 Mal Péter carampe ar quente Yésunna: “Heru, vanima ná i nalme sisse! Qui meril, ortauvan sisse *lancoar nelde: er lyen ar er Mósen ar er Elían!” 5 Íre i quettar en náner antoryasse, yé! calima fanya teltane te, ar enge óma et i fanyallo ya quente: “Si yondonya ná, i melda, pa ye nanye fastaina; á lasta senna!” 6 Hlárala si, i hildor lantaner cendeleltasse ar náner ita caurie. 7 Tá Yésus túle hare téna, ar appala te quentes: “Á orta, ar áva ruce!” 8 Íre ortanelte hendultat, cennelte *úquen hequa Yésus immo. 

CHAPTER 17
Six days thereafter Jesus brought [along] Peter and Jacob and John his brother, and led them up into a lofty mountain, they alone. 2 And he was changed before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes were radiant as light. 3 And behold! Moses and Eliah showed themselves [intu, dual] to them, speaking with him. 4 But Peter spoke and said to Jesus: “Lord, [it] is good that we are here. If you wish, I will erect here three tents: one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah!” 5 While the words were still in his mouth, behold! a bright cloud overshadowed them, and there was a voice out of the cloud that said: “This is my son, the beloved, with [pa = concerning] whom I am pleased; listen to him!” 6 Hearing this, the disiciples fell on their face and were extremely afraid. 7 Then Jesus came near to them, and touching them he said: “Rise, and do not fear!” 8 When they raised their eyes, they saw no one except Jesus himself.

	9 Tieltasse undu i orontello, Yésus canne tien, quétala: “Áva nyare aiquenen pa i cenie nó i Atanyondo anaie ortana qualinillon!”
	10 Mal i hildor maquenter: “Tá manen ná in i parmangolmor quetir in Elía maurenen tuluva minyave?” 11 Hanquentasse eques: “Elía é tuluva ar envinyatauva ilye nati. 12 Mal quetin lyenna i Elía utúlie yando sí, ar ualte hanyane man anes, mal carner sen ve mernelte. Mi imya lé i Atanyondo perperuva máltanten.” 13 Tá i hildor hanyaner i quentes téna pa Yohannes i *Sumbando.

	9 On their way down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying: “Do not tell anyone about the sigth [= vision] before the Son of man has been raised from the dead!”
	10 But the disciples asked: “Then how is [it] that the scribes say that Elijah by necessity will come first?” 11 In answer he said: “Elijah will indeed come and will renew all things. 12 But I say to you that Elijah has come even now, and they did not understand who he was, but did to him as they wished. In the same manner the Son of Man will suffer at their hands.” 13 Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them about John the Baptist.

	14 Ar íre túlelte i şanganna, nér túle senna, lantala occaryanta epe se 15 ar quétala: “Heru, órava yondonyasse, an náse *ránahlaiwa ar nimpa, an lantas rimbave mir i náre ar rimbave mir i nén,  16 ar tallenyes hildolyannar, mal ualte polde nesta se!” 17 Hanquentasse Yésus quente: “Úvoronda ar rícina *nónare, manen andave mauya nin lemya aselde? Manen andave mauya nin cole le? Áse tala ninna!” 18 Tá Yésus carampe tulcave senna, ar i rauco ettúle sello, ar i seldo náne nestana lúme yanallo. 

	14 And when they came to the crowd, a man came to him, falling to his knees [dual] before him 15 and saying: “Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is moon-sick and ailing, and he falls frequently into the fire and frequently into the water, 16 and I brought him to your disciples, but they could not heal him!” 17 In answer Jesus said: “Unfaithful and twisted generation, how long is it necessary for me to remain with you? How long is it necessary for me to bear you? Bring him to me!” 18 Then Jesus spoke firmly to it, and the demon came out of him, and the boy was healed from that hour.

	19 Epeta i hildor túler vérave Yésunna ar quenter: “Manen ná in elme uar polde et-hatitas?” 20 Quentes téna: “Pitya savieldanen. An násie quetin lenna: Qui samilde savie ve erde *sinapio, quetuvalde oron sinanna: Leva silo tar, ar levuvas, ar munta nauva úcárima len. [21]
	22 Íre anelte comyane Alileasse Yésus quente téna: “I Atanyondo nauva *vartaina mannar atanion, 23 ar nahtuvaltes, ar i nelya auresse nauvas ortana!” Etta sámelte lunga naire. 

	19 Thereafter the disciples came privately to Jesus and said: “How is [it] that we could not throw it out?” 20 He said to them: “Because of your small faith. For truly I say to you: If you have faith like a seed of mustard, you will say to this mountain: Move form here to there, and it will move, and nothing will be impossible to you. [21]
	22 When they were gathered in Galilee Jesus said to them: “The Son of Man will be betrayed into the hands of men, 23 and they will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised!” Therefore they had deep grief.

	24 Íre túlelte Capernaumenna, i neri comyala i racma atta túler Péterenna ar quente: “Ma *peantarelda ua paitya i *racma atta?” 25 Quentes: “Caris.” Mal íre lendes mir i coa, nó polles quete, Yésus quente: “Mana sanal, Símon? Ho man cemeno arani camir *tungwe hya *rantie? Yondoltallon hya etteleallon?” 26 Íre hé quente, “I etteleallon,” Yésus quente senna: “Tá i yondor é nar lére. 27 Mal in uangwe caruva te rúşie, alye lelya i earenna, hata ampa, ar á mapa i minya lingwe tulila ama – ar íre latyal antorya, hiruval stater. Á mapa ta ar áten anta sa nin ar lyen!”

	24 When they came to Capernaum, the men collecting [lit. gathering] the two dracmas came to Peter and said: “Does not your [pl.] teacher pay the two dracmas?” 25 He said: “He does.” But when he went into the house, before he could speak, Jesus said: “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of earth receive tax or tribute? From their sons or from foreigners?” 26 When he said: “From the foreigners,” Jesus said to him: “Then the sons are indeed free. 27 But that we will not make them angry, you go to the sea, throw a hook, and take the first fish coming up – and when you open its mouth, you will find a stater. Take that and give it to them for me and for you!”

RANTA 18
Lúme yanasse i hildor túler hare Yésunna ar quenter: “Man nanwave ná i antúra menelo araniesse?” 2 Ar apa yaldes pitya hína insenna, se-tyarnes tare i endesse 3 ar quente: “Násie quetin lenna: Qui ualde hire inwis ar nar ve pitye híni, laume tuluvalde mir menelo aranie. 4 Etta, aiquen ye care inse nalda ve hína sina, isse ná i antúra menelo araniesse; 5 ar aiquen ye came erya taite hína essenyanen, came ní. 6 Mal aiquen ye tyare lanta er mici sine i savir nisse – sen nauva ambe aşea qui *mulondo náne panyana *os yahtya, ar anes quórina mí núra ear.

CHAPTER 18 
At that time the disciples came near to Jesus and said: “Who really is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” 2 And after he called a small child to himself, he caused it to stand in the middle 3 and said: “Truly I say to you: If you do not find repentance and are like small children, you will by no means come into the kingdom of heaven. 4 Therefore, anyone who makes himself lowly like this chind, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven; 5 and anyone who receives a single such child in my name, receives me. 6 But anyone who causes to fall one among these who believe in me – to him it is more beneficial if a millstone was put around his neck, and he was drowned in the deep sea.

	7 Horro i marden úsahtieryain! An i úsahtier maurenen tuluvar, man horro i atanen yenen i úsahtie tule! 8 Mal qui málya hya talelya tyára lantelya, ása aucire ar hata sa lyello! Mene *lalevíte hya tapta mir coivie ná lyen arya epe náve hátina arwa má atto hya tál atto mir i oira náre! 9 Ar qui hendelya tyára lantelya, ása narca ettenna ar hata sa lyello! Mene mir coivie arwa erya hendo ná lyen arya epe náve hátina arwa hen atto mir i uruite Ehenna! 10 Cena in ualde nattire aiquen mici pityar sine! An quetin lenna i valaltar menelde illume yétar meneldea Atarinyo cendele.

	7 Woe to the world for its temptations! For the temptations will by necessity come, but woe to the man by whom the temptation comes! 8 But if your hand or your foot is causing your fall, cut it off and throw it [away] from you! To go lame or maimed [tapta, impeded] into life is to you better than being thrown having two hands or two feet into the eternal fire! 9 And if your eye is causing your fall, tear it out and throw it [away] from you! To go into life having a single eye is to you better than being thrown having two eyes into the fiery Gehenna! 10 See that you [pl.] do not despise anyone among these little ones! For I say to you that their angels in heaven always look at my heavenly Father's face.

	11 An i Atanyondo utúlie rehtien ya náne vanwa. 12 Mana sanalde? Qui nér same mámar tuxa, ar er mici te ranya, ma uas auta ho i nerte *neterquean i orontissen, ar menis cestien i ranyala máma? 13 Ar qui é hirises – násie quétan lenna, pa máma tana samis alasse túra epe ya samis pa i nerte *neterquean i uar aránie. 14 Mi imya lé, meneldea Atarinyo indóme ua in erya mici pityar sine nauva vanwa.

	11 For the Son of Man has come to save that which was lost. 12 What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep, and one among them strays, does he not go away from the ninti-nine on the mountains, and he goes to seek the straying sheep? 13 And if he does find it – truly I say to you, about that shep he has a joy greater than [that] which he has about the ninety-nine that have not strayed. 14 In the same manner, my heavenly Father's will is not that a single among these little ones will be lost.

	15 Ente, qui hánolya úcare, mena ar áse naitya imbe lyé ar sé erinque. Qui lastas lyenna, eñétiel hánolya. 16 Mal qui uas lasta, á tala aselye er hya atta ambe, an i antonen astarmor atto hya neldeo ilya natto nauva tulcana. 17 Qui uas lasta túna, queta i ocombenna. Qui loitas lasta yú i ocombenna, nauvas lyen ve quén i nórion ar ve *tungwemo. 
	18 Násie quetin lenna, ilqua ya nutilde cemende nauva nútina menelde, ar ilqua ya lehtalde cemende nauva lehtana menelde. 19 Ata násie quetin lenna: Qui atta mici le nát er sámo cemende arcien nat, ta martuva tunt meneldea Atarinyanen. An yasse atta hya nelde nar comyane mi essenya, tasse ean endaltasse. 

	15 Furthermore, if your brother sins, go and rebuke him between you and he alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother. 16 But if he does not listen, bring with you one or two others, for by the mouth of two or three witnesses every affair shall be established. 17 If he does not listen to them [dual], speak to the congregation. If he fails to listen to the congregation as well, he is to be to you as a person of the nations or as a tax collector.
	18 Truly I say to you, everything that you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and everything that you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 19 Again I truly say to you: If two among you are of one mind on earth to request something, that will happen for them by my heavenly Father. For where two or thre are gathered in my name, there I am in their midst.

	21 Tá Péter túle ar quente senna: “Heru, mana nóte i lúron yassen hánonya lerta úcare ninna ar apsenuvan sen? Tenna lúr otso?” Yésus quente senna: “Quétan lyenna, lá tenna lúr otso, mal tenna *otoquean lúr otso! 23 Etta menelo aranie ná ve nér, aran, ye merne same onótie as móliryar. 24 Íre *yestanes i onótie, qúen arwa rohto talention húmi quean náne tulyana senna. 25 Pan uas sáme fáre paitien sen, herurya canne i mo vacumne se, as verirya ar hínaryar, ar ilqua ya sámes, paitien i rohta. 26 Etta i mól lantane undu ar luhtane epe se, quétala: “Sama cóle nin, ar paityuvan nan ilqua lyen!” 27 Ápaina endaryanna, sana mólo heru lehtane se ar apsenne rohtarya.

21 Then Peter came and said to them: “Lord, what is number of times when my brother may sin against me and I am to forgive him? As far as seven times?” Jesus said to him: “I say to you, not as far as seven times, but as far as seventy times seven! 23 Therefore the kingdom of heaven is like a man, a king, who wished to have a reckoning with his thralls. 24 When he started the reckoning, a person having a debt of  ten thousand talents was brought to him. 25 Since he did not have enough to pay him, his lord commanded that one was to sell him, with his wife and his children, and everything that he had, in order to pay the debt. 26 Therefore the thrall fell down and bowed before him, saying: “Have patience with me [nin = for me], and I will pay back everything to you!” 24 Being touched to his heart, the lord of that thrall released him and forgave his debt.

	28 Mal sana mól etelende ar hirne quén i hyane mólion, ye sáme sen rohta lenárion tuxa. Ar mápala se, *yestanes quore se, quétala: “Ánin paitya rohtalya!” 29 Tá i hyana mól lantane undu ar arcane senna, quétala: “Sama cóle nin, ar paityuvan lyen!” 30 Mal uas merne, ono lendes ar hante hé mir mando tenna hé paityumne rohtarya. 31 Etta, íre i hyane móli cenner ya martane, sámelte tumna naire, ar lendelte ar nyarner herultan ilqua ya martanelyane. 32 Tá herurya tultane se ar quente senna: “Olca mól, quanda rohtalya apsennen lyen, íre arcanel ninna! 33 Lau tá carumnel mai qui yú lyé oravumne i hyana mólesse ye enge aselye, ve inye antane lyen oravie?” 34 Ar nála rúşea, herurya antane se ollo i *mandonturin, tenna paityumnes quanda rohtarya. 35 Mí imya lé meneldea Atarinya yú caruva len qui ualde ilquen apsene hánoryan endaldallo!”

	28 But that slave went out and found a person of the other slaves, who had to him a debt of a hundred denarii. And seizing him, he began to choke him, saying: “Pay me your debt!” 29 Then the other slave fell down and made request of him, saying: “Have patience with me, and I will pay you!” 30 But he did not want to, but he went and threw him into prison until he would pay his debt. 31 Therefore, when the other slaves saw [that] which happened, they had deep grief, and they went and told to their lord everything that had happened. 32 Then his lord summoned him and said to him: “Wicked slave, your entire debt I forgave you, when you asked of me! 33 Would you not then do well if you as well would have mercy on the other slave who was with you, as I gave you mercy?” 34 And being angry, his lord gave him over to the jailers, until he was going to pay his entire debt. 35 In the same manner my heavenly Father will also do to you if you do not everyone forgive his brother from your heart!”

RANTA 19 
Ar apa Yésus telyane ilye quettar sine oantes Alileallo ar túler i ménannar Yúreo, Yordan pella. 2 Ar hoe şangali hilyaner se, ar te-nestanes tasse.
	3 Ar Farisali túler senna tyastien se, quétala: “Ma lerta nér lehta inse veriryallo ilya castanen?” 4 Hanquentasse eques: “Ma ualde hentane i ye ontane tu, i yestallo carne tu hanu yo ní 5 ar quente: Sina castanen nér autuva ataryallo ar amilleryallo ar himyuva verirya, ar nauvatte hráve er – ? 6 Sie uatte ambe atta, mal hráve er. Etta, ya Eru apánie nu er yalta, áva lave atanen hyare!” 7 Quentelte senna: “Tá manen ná i Móses canne i mo antauva sen tecie *aumentaléva ar panyuva se oa?” 8 Quentes téna: “Hranga endaldanen Móses láve i lertalde lehta inde verildallon, mal lá enge sie i yestallo. 9 Ar quetin lenna: Aiquen ye lehta immo veriryallo hequa *úpuhtiénen, ar verya exenna, race vestale!”

CHAPTER 19
And after Jesus completed all these words he went away from Galilee and came to the regions of Judea, beyond the Jordan. 2 And great crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
	3 And some Pharisees came to him to test him, saying: “May a man divorce [lit. loosen himself from] his wife for every [conceivable] reason?” 4 In answer he said: “Did you not read that [he] who created them, from the beginning made them male and female 5 and said: For this reason a man will abandon his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and they [dual] will be one flesh – ? 6 Thus they [dual] are no more two, but one flesh. Therefore, [that] which God has put under one yoke, do not let man separate!” 7 They said to him: “Then how is [it] that Moses commanded that one is to give her a writing of divoce [aumentie, away-sending] and is to put her away?” 8 He said to them: “Because of your hard heart Moses allowed that you may divorce [lit. loosen yourselves from] your wifes, but it was not so from the beginning. 9 And I say to you: Anyone who divorces his wife except because of fornication, and gets married to another, breaks marriage!”

	 10 I hildor quenter senna: “Qui ea sie pa veru yo veri, vestale ua aşea!” 11 Quentes téna: “Illi uar pole came i quetie, mal rie i samir i anna. 12 An ear *vielórali i náner nóne sie amillelto mónallo, ar ear *vielórali i náner cárine *vielóre lo atani, ar ear *vielórali i acárier inte *vielóre menelo araniéno márien. Lava yen pole camitas, came sa!”
	13 Tá hínali náner talaine senna, panieryan máryat tesse ar hyamieryan tien, mal i hildor naityaner te. 14 Mal Yésus quente: “Lava i hínin tule, ar ávate pusta tuliello ninna, an menelo aranie taitin ná!” 15 Ar panyanes máryat tesse ar oante talo.

	10 The disciples said to him: “If it is so concerning husband and wife, marriage is not beneficial!” 11 He said to them: “All cannot receive the saying, but only [those] that have the gift. 12 For there are some eunuchs [*vielórali = penis-less ones] that were born so from their mother's womb, and there are some eunuchs that were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs that have have made themselves eunuchs for the good of the kingdom of heaven. Let [the one] that can receive it, receive it!”
	13 Then children were being brought to him, for him to put his hands on them and for him to pray for them, but the disciples rebuked them. [Naitya- = abuse, put to shame.] 14 But Jesus said: “Let the children come, and do not stop them from coming to me, for the kingdom of heaven is for suchlike ones!” 15 And he put his hands on them and went away from there.

	16 Ar yé! quén túle senna ar quente: “*Peantar, mana i márie ya mauya nin care, camien oira coivie?” 17 Quentes senna: “Manen ná i maquétal ní pa márie? Ea er ye mára ná. Mal qui meril mene mir coivie, á himya i axani!” 18 Quentes senna: “Mana nalte?” Yésus hanquente: “Ávalye nahta, ávalye pile, ávalye quete hurila *vettie, 19 alye anta alcar atarelyan ar amillelyan, ar mela armarolya ve imle!” 20 I nessa nér quente senna: “Ihímien ilye axani sine; mana en penin?” 21 Yésus quente senna: “Qui meril náve ilvana, mena ar vaca armalyar ar átai anta i penyain, ar camuval harma menelde; tá tula ar áni hilya!” 22 Íre i nessa nér hlasse ta, oantes nairesse, an sámes rimbe armali.
	23 Mal Yésus quente hildoryannar: “Násie quétan lenna in urda nauva lára quenen tule mir menelo aranie. 24 Ata quétan lenna: Ulumpen menie ter nelmo assa ná ancárima epe tulie mir Eruo aranie lára quenen!”

	16 And behold, one came to him and said: “Teacher, what is the good that it is necessary for me to do, in order to receive eternal life?” 17 He said to him: “How is [it] that you are asking me about goodness? There exists one whois good. But if you want to go into life, keep the commandments!” 18 He said to him: “What are they?” Jesus answered: “You shall not kill, you shall not steal, you shall not speak a lying witness, 19 you shall give glory to your father and to your mother, and love your neighbour as yourself!” 20 The young man said to him: “I have kept all these commandments; what do I still lack?” 21 Jesus said to him: “If you want to be perfect, go and sell your goods and give them to the poor, and you will receive a treasure in heaven; then come and follow me!” 22 When the young man heard that, he went away in grief, for he had numerous goods.
	23 But Jesus said to his disciples: “Truly I say to you that it will be difficult for a rich person to come into the kingdom of heaven. 24 Again I say to you: For a camel to go through a needle's eye [assa = hole] is easier than coming into God's kingdom for a rich person.

	25 Íre i hildor hlasser ta, anelte quátine túra elmendanen, quétala: “Man pole náve rehtana?” 26 Yétala te, Yésus quente: “Atanin nas úcárima, mal Erun ilye nati nar cárime!”
	27 Tá Péter carampe, quétala: “Yé, ehehtielme ilqua ar ihílier lyé. Mana, nanwave, euva men?” 28 Yésus quente téna: “Násie quetin lenna: I *enontiesse, íre i Atanyondo hamúva alcarinqua mahalmaryanna, elde i ihílier ni yú hamuvar mahalassen yunque, namila Israélo nossi yunque. 28 Ar ilquen ye oantie ho coar hya hánor hya néşar hya restar castanen essenyo, camuva rimbe lúli amba ar nauva aryon oira coiviéno. 29 Mal rimbali i nar minye nauvar métime, ar i métimar, minye.

	25 When the disciples heart that, they wre filled with great wonder, saying: “Who can be saved?” 26 Looking at them, Jesus said: “To men it is impossible, but to God all things are possible!”
	27 Then Peter spoke, saying: “Behold, we have abandoned everything and have followed you. What, really, will there be for us?” 28 Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you: In the resurrection, when the Son of Man shall sit down upon his glorious throne, you that have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging Israel's twelve tribes. 28 And everyone who has gone away from houses or brothers or sisters or fields by reason of my name, will receive many times more and will be heir to eternal life. 29 But numerous ones that are first will be last, and the last, first.

RANTA 20 TATT
An menelo aranie ná ve nér, *coantur, ye etelende arinyave hirien *molindoli in poldes paitya molieltan tarwaryasse liantassion. 2 Apa carie vére as i *molindor pa er lenár i auren, mentanes te mir tarwarya. 3 Etelendes yú *os i neldea lúme ar cenne exeli tára pen molie mí mancalenóme, 4 ar quentes yú téna: “Yú elde, á lelya mir i tarwa, ar antauvan len ya faila ná!” 5 Ar lendelte. Ata lendes ettenna *os i enquea ar i nertea lúme, ar carnes i imya nat. 6 Mal *os i minquea lúme lendes ettenna ar hirne exeli tára, ar quentes téna: “Manen ná i táralde sisse i quanda aure pen molie?” 7 Quentelte senna: “Pan *úquen acárie vére aselme pa molie!” Quentes téna: “Mena i tarwanna liantassion, yú elde!”

CHAPTER 20 
For the kingdom of heaven is like a man, an householder, who went out early to find workers that he could pay for them to work in his garden of vines [= his vineyard]. 2 After making an agreement [vére, compact] with the workers about one denarius for the [work of the] day, he sent them into his garden. 3 He also went out around the third hour and saw some others stand without work in the market-place, 4 and he said to them as well: “You as well, go into the garden, and I shall give you what is just!” 5 And they went. Again he went out around the sixth and the ninth hour, and he did the same thing. 6 But around the eleventh hour he went out and found some others standing, and he said to them: “How is [it] that you are standing here the whole day without working?” 7 They said to him: “Because nobody has made an agreement with us about working!” He said to them: “Go to the garden of vines, you as well!”

	8 Íre şinye túle, i *tarwantur quente *ortirnoryanna: Yala i *molindor ar á paitya tien *paityalelta, i métimallon i minyannar! 9 Íre i minquea lúmeo neri túler, ilquen mici te camne lenár. 10 Etta, íre i minyar túler, intyanelte i camumnelte amba, mal ilquen mici té yú camne er lenár. 11 Apa camie sa nurrunelte i *tarwanturenna 12 ar quenter: “Métimar sine omólier erya lúme, ananta antal tien i imya ya antal men i ocólier i aureo cólo ar i úre!” 13 Mal hanquentasse quenenna mici te quentes: “Málo, acárien munta úfaila lyen! Şáquentel íre quenten in antauvanen lyen er lenár, lá? 14 Á mapa ya *lyenya ná ar mena! Merin anta métima sinan i imya ya antan lyen. 15 Ma uan lerta care ya merin vére natinyain? Hya ma hendelya olca ná pan inye mane ná? 
	Sie i métimar nauvar minye, ar i minyar métime!”

	8 When evening came, the master of the garden said to his overseer: Call the workers and pay them their payment, from the last ones to the first ones! 9 When the men of the eleventh hour came, everyone among them received a denarius. 10 Therefore, when the first ones came, they supposed that they were going to receive more, but everyone among them also received one denarius. 11 After receiving it they grumbled against the garden-master 12 and said: These last ones have worked a single hour, and yet you give them the same that you give to us that have carried the burden of the day and the heat! 13 But in answer to one among them he said: 'Fellow, I have done nothing unrighteous to you! You assented when I said that I was going to give you one denarius, no? 14 Take what is yours and go! I want to give this this last one the same that I give to you. 15 May I not do what I want to my own things? Or is your eye wicked since I am good?
	Thus the last ones will be first, and the first ones last!”

	17 Sí, nó lendes ama Yerúsalemenna, Yésus tulyane i hildor yunque véra nómenna ar quente téna: 18 “Yé! Lelyuvalme ama Yerúsalemenna, ar i Atanyondo nauva antana olla i hére *airimoin ar i parmangolmoin, ar namuvaltes valda qualmeo 19 ar antauvaltes olla i nórin, lengieltan senna yaiwenen ar riptieltan se ar tarwestieltan se, ar i neldea auresse nauvas ortana!”

	17 Now, before he went up to Jerusalem, Jesus led the twelve disciples to a private place and said to them: 18 “Behold! We will go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be given over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will judge him worthy of death 19 and will give him over to the nations, for them to behave towards him with scorn and for them to flay him and for them to crucify him, and on the third day he will be raised!”

	20 Tá Severaio yondoron amil túle senna as yondoryar, luhtala epe se ar arcala nat sello. 21 Yésus quente senna: “Mana meril?” Isse quente senna: “Queta i yondonya atta sine haruvat, quén ara formalya ar quén ara hyarmalya, aranielyasse!” 22 Hanquentasse Yésus quente: “Uaste ista ya arcaste! Ma lét polit suce i yulma ya inye sucuva?” Quentette senna: “Polimme!” 23 Quentes túna: “É sucuvaste yulmanya, mal harie ara formanya ar hyarmanya ua anna inye lerta anta; ta ná in nar manwane lo Atarinya!”
	24 Íre i exi quean hlasser pa si, anelte rúşie i háno attanna. 25 Mal Yésus yalde te insenna ar quente: “Istalde i nórion turi turir tai, ar tauraltar samir túre or te. 26 Mal ua ea sie mici elde, ono ye mere náve túra mici lé, sen mauya náve núrolda, 
	27 ar yen mere náve minya mici le, sen mauya náve mólelda 
	28 – ve yú i Atanyondo ua túle náven *veuyaina, mal *vevien ar antaven cuilerya ve *nanwere quaptalesse rimbaiva!”

	20 Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee [Severai] came to him with her sons, bowing before him and requesting something of him. 21 Jesus said to her: “What do you want?” She said to him: “Say that these two sons of mine will sit, one by your right hand and one by your left hand, in your kingdom!” 22 In answer Jesus said: “You [dual] do not know what you request! Are you able to drink the cup that I will drink?” They said to him: “We [dual excl.] are able!” 23 He said to them:  “You will indeed drink my cup, but sitting by my right hand and my left hand is not a gift I may give; that is for those that are prepared by my Father!”
	24 When the ten others heard about this, they were angry with [-nna 'at'] the two brothers. 25 But Jesus called them to himself and said: “You know the rulers of the nations rule them, and their mighty ones have power over them. 
	26 But it is not so among you, but [the one] who wants to be great among you, for him it is necessary to be your slave 
	27 [MISSING?]
	28 – like also the Son of Man did not come to be served, but in order to serve and to give his life as a ransom in exchange of many!”

	29 Sí, íre lendelte et Yericollo hoa şanga hilyane se. 30 Ar yé! laceníte nér atta hámanet ara i malle. Íre hlassette i Yésus náne i quén lahtala, yámette quétala: “Heru, órava metse, Lavirion!” 31 Mal i şanga carampe túna tulcave, návettan quilde; ananta yámette i ambe: “Heru, órava metse, Lavirion!” 32 Ar Yésus pustane, yalde tu ar quente: “Mana meriste i caruvan lent?” 33 Quentette senna: “Heru, nai hendummat nauvat pantaine!” 34 Ápaina endaryanna, Yésus appane henduttat – ar mi yana lú ence tunt cene, ar hilyanettes.

	29 Now, when they went out of Jericho a great crowd followed him. 30 And behold! two blind men were sitting by the road. When they heard that Jesus was the person passing by, they cried saying: “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!” 31 But the crowd spoke firmly to them, for them to be silent; and yet they cried the more: “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!” 32 And Jesus stopped, called them and said: “What do you wish that I will do for you?” 33 They said to him: “Lord, may our eyes be opened!” 34 Being touched to his heart, Jesus touched their eyes – and in the same moment it was possible for them to see, and they followed him.

RANTA 21
Íre túlelte hare Yerúsalemenna ar túler Vet-Fahenna i Orontenna *Milloaldaron, tá Yésus etementane hildo atta, quétala túna: “Mena mir i osto ya caita epe tu, ar lintave hiruvaste *pellope nútina, ar *rocolle óse; átu lehta ar átu tulya ninna. 3 Ar qui quén quete *aiqua lenta, queta: I Heru same maure túva. Tá, mi imya lú, mentauvas tu!”
	4 Nat sina martane carien anwa i quetta ya i Erutercáno quente: 5 “Nyara Siono selyen: Yé, aranelya túla lyenna, nalda ar hámala *pellopesse, ar *rocollesse, onna celvo cólova!”

CHAPTER 21 
When they came near to Jerusalem and came to Bethphage to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent forth two disciples, saying to them: “Go into the city that lies before you, and quickly you will find a donkey bound, and a colt with it; loose them [tu, dual] and lead them to me. 3 And if somebody says anything to you, say: The Lord has need of them [tú-va them-of]. Then, in the same moment, he will send them!”
	4 This thing happened to make true the word which the prophet spoke: 5 “Tell the daughter of Zion: Behold, your king is coming to you, lowly and sitting on a donkey and on a cold, offspring of a beast of burden!”

	6 Sie i hildor lender ar carner ve Yésus canne tun. 7 Ar tulunette i *pellope ar *rocollerya, ar panyanette tusse collattar, ar hamnes tusse. 8 I ambe hoa ranta i şango pantaner collaltar i mallesse, íre exeli hocirner olvali i aldallon ar pantaner tai i mallesse. 9 Ar i şangar yar lender epe se ar i hilyaner yámer: “Hosanna yondon Laviro! Aistana ná ye túla i Heruo essenen!  Hosanna i tarmenissen!” 
	10 Ar íre lendes mir Yerúsalem, i quanda osto náne valtana, quétala: “Man ná quen sina?” 11 Mal i şangar hanquenter: “Si ná Yésus i Erutercáno, Nasaretello Alileasse!”
	12 Ar Yésus lende mir i corda, ar et-hantes ilye i vancer ar *homancaner i cordasse, ar sarnor i *telpevistandoiva nuquernes, ar i hammar iva vancer i cucuar. 13 Ar quentes téna: “Ná técina: Coanya nauva estaina coa hyamiéva – mal elde acárier sa rotto piluiva!” 

	6 Thus the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them. 7 And they [dual] brought the donkey and its colt, and they put on them [dual] their cloaks, and he sat upon them. 8 The greater part of the crown spread out their cloaks on the road, while others cut off branches from the trees and spread them out in the road. 9 And the crowds that went before him and the ones that followed cried: “Hosanna for the son of David! Blessed is [he] who is coming in the Lord's name! Hosanna in the highest places!”
	10 And when he went into Jerusalem, the entire city was exited, saying: “Who is this person?” 11 But the crowds answered: “This is Jesus the Prophet, from Nazareth in Galilee!”
	12 And Jesus went into the temple, and he threw out all that sold and bought in the temple, and the tables of the money-changers he overturned, and the chairs of [those] that sold the doves. 13 And he said to them: “It is written: My house will be called a house of prayer – but you have made it a cave of robbers!”

	14 Ente, laceníti ar *lalevíti queneli túler senna i cordasse, ar nestanes te.
	15 Íre i hére *airimor ar i parmangolmor cenner i elmendar yar carnes ar i seldor yámala i cordasse: “Hosianna Yondon Laviro!”, anelte rúşie 16 ar quenter senna: “Ma hláral ya té quétar?” Yésus quente téna: “Ná! Ma ualde oi hentane si: Et antollo lapsion ar vinimoron amanwiel laitale – ?” 17 Ar oantes tello ar lende et i ostollo Vetanianna ar lemne tasse ter i lóme. 
	18 Nanwénala i cordanna arinyave, anes maita. 19 Ar cennes *relyávalda ara i malle ar lende senna, mal hirnes munta sesse hequa rie lasseli, ar quentes senna: “Nai *úquen oi camuva yáve lyello!” Ar mi imya lú i *relyávalda hestane. 20 Mal íre i hildor cenner ta, anelte elmendasse, quétala: “Manen i *relyávalda hestane mi erya lú?” 21 Hanquentasse Yésus quente téna: “Násie quetin lenna: Qui samilde savie ar uar iltance, ualde rie caruva ya inye carne i *relyávaldan, mal yú qui quetilde oron sinanna: Na ortana ar hátina mir i ear!, ta martuva. 22 Ar ilye i nati yar arcalde hyamiesse, arwe saviéno, camuvalde!”

	14 Furthermore, blind and lame people came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
	15 When the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonders that he did and the boys crying in the temple: “Hosianna to the Son of David,” they were angry 16 and said to him: “Are you hearing what they are saying?” Jesus said to them: “Yes! Did you not ever read this: From the mouth of babes and babies you have prepared praise – ? 17 And he went away from them and went out of the city and remained there through the night.
	18 Returning to the temple early, he was hungry. 19 And he saw a fig tree beside the road and went to it, but he found nothing on it except only some leaves, and he said to it: “May nobody ever receive fruit from you!” And in the same moment the fig tree withered. 20 But when the disciples saw that, they were in wonder, saying: “How did the fig tree wither in a single moment?” 21 In answer Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you: If you have faith and are not uncertain, you will not do only what I did to the fig tree, but also if you say to this mountain: Be lifted and thrown into the sea!, that will happen. 22 And all the things that you request in prayer, having faith, you will receive!”

	23 Sí apa lendes mir i corda, i hére *airimor ar i amyárar imíca i lie túler senna íre peantanes i şanga ar quenter: “Mana i hére yanen caril nati sine? Ar man antane lyen hére sina?” 24 Hanquentesse Yésus quente téna: “Yú inye maquetuva lenna pa er nat. Qui nyarilde nin, yú inye nyaruva len pa i hére yanen carin nati sine. 25 Yoháno sumbie, mallo anes? Menello hya atanillon?” Mal carnelte úvie mici inte, quétala: “Qui quetilve: Menello, quetuvas venna: Tá manen ná i ualde sáve sesse? 26 Mal qui quetilve: Atanillon, rucuvalve i şangallo, an illi mici te savir i Yoháno náne Erutercáno!” 27 Ar hanquentasse quentelte Yésunna: “Ualme ista!” Yú isse quente téna: “Tá inye véla ua nyare len pa i hére yanen carin nati sine. 

23 Now after he went into the temple, the chief priests and the elders among the people came to him while he was teaching the crowd and said: “What is the authority by which you do these things? And who gave you this authority?” 24 In answer Jesus said to them: “I as well will ask you about one thing. If you tell me, I too will tell you about the authority with which I do these things. 25 John's baptism, where was it from? From heaven or from men?” But they made a consideration among themselves, saying: “If we say: From heaven, he will say to us: Then how is [it] that you did not believe in him? 26 But if we say: From men, we will [have to] fear the crowd, for all mong them beliee that John was a prophet!” 27 And in answer they said to Jesus: “We do not know!” He as well said to them: “Then I alike do not tell you about the authority with which I do these things!”

28 Mal mana sanalde? Enge nér as hína atta. Lendes i minyanna ar quente: Hína, síra mola i tarwasse liantassion! 29 Hé quente: Ménan, heru! – mal uas lende. 30 Lelyala i exenna, quentes i imya nat. Mal hanquentasse hé quente: Uan mere. Ono epeta vistanes sámarya ar lende. 31 Man imíca i atta carne i ataro nirme?” Quentelte: “I attea!” Yésus quente téna: “Násie quetin lenna: I *tungwemor ar i *imbacindi lelyar epe lé mir Eruo aranie. 32 An Yoháno túle lenna mí malle failiéva, mal ualde sáver sesse. Mal i *tungwemor ar i *imbacindi sáver sesse, ar elde, ómu cennelde ta, uar epeta vistane sámalda savien sesse.

28 But what do you think? [There] was a man with two children. He went to the first one and said: Child, today work in the garden of wines! 29 He said: I am going, lord! – but he did not go. 30 Going to the other, he said the same thing. But in answer he said: I do not want to. But afterwards he changed his mind and went. 31 Who among the two did the father's will?” They said: “The second one!” Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you: The tax collectors and the harlots go before you into God's kingdom. 32 For John came to you in the way of righteousness, but you did not believe in him. But the tax collectors and the harlots believed in him, and you, though you saw that, did not afterwards change your mind so as to believe in him.

	33 Hlara hyana sestie: Enge nér, *coantur, ye empanne tarwa liantassion, pelde sa pelonen, sampe *limpevorma ar carastane mindo. Tá láves *alamólin *yuhta sa telpen, ar lende ettelea nórenna. 34 Íre i lúme yáviva túle, mentanes núroryar ñetien yáveryar. 35 Mal i *alamor namper núroryar, ar er palpanelte, exe nacantelte, exenna hantelte sarni tenna qualles. 36 Ata mentanes hyane núroli, rimbe epe i minyar, mal carnelte i imya tien. 37 I mettasse mentanes yondorya téna, quétala: “Samuvalte áya yondonyan!” 38 Cénala i yondo, i *alamor quenter mici inte: “Si i aryon ná; tula, alve nahta se ar ñete *aryonierya!” 39 Ar mápala se, hanteltes et i tarwallo ar nacanter se. 40 Etta, íre i *tarwantur tuluva, mana caruvas sine *alamoin?” 

	33 Hear another comparison: There was a man, a householder, who planted a garden of vines [a vineyard], surrounded it with a fence, dug a wine-press and built a tower. Then he let some cultivators use it for money, and went to foreign country. 34 When the time of fruits came, he sent his servants to get his fruits. 35 But the cultivators took his servants, and one they beat up, another they slew, on another they threw stones until he died. 36 Again he sent other servants, more numerous than the first ones, but they did the same to them. 37 In the end he sent his son to them, saying: “They will have awe for my son!” 38 Seeing the son, the cultivators said among themselves: “This is the heir; come, let us kill him and get his inheritance!” 39 And seizing him, they threw him out of the garden and killed him. 40 Therefore, when the garden-master shall come, what will he do to these cultivators?”

41 Quentelte: “Sine ulcain antauvas ulca metta, ar lavuvas hyane *alamoin *yuhta i tarwa, i antauvar sen i yávi íre i lúme utúlie!” 42 Yésus quente téna: “Lau hentanelde i tehtelessen: I ondo ya i şamnor querner oa, sá olólie cas i vinco. I Hérullo si utúlie, ar nas elmenda hendulmatse – ? 43 Etta quetin lenna: Eruo aranie nauva mapana oa lello ar antana nóren cárala yáveryar. 44 Ar ye lanta ondo sinanna nauva rácina; mal aiquen yenna lantas – aqua ascatuvas se. 
	45 Ar íre i hére *airimor ar i Farisar hlasser sestieryar, sintelte i quentes pa té, 46 ar ómu cestanelte mapa se runcelte i şangallo, pan sannelte pa se ve Erutercáno.

41 They said: “To these evil ones he will give an evil end, and he will let other cultivators use the garden, [some] that will give him the fruits when the time has come!” 42 Jesus said to them: “Have you really not read in the scriptures: The rock which the builders turned away, it has become head of the corner. From the Lord this has come, and it is a wonder in our eyes – ? 43 Therefore I say to you: The Kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a nation making its fruits. 44 And who falls upon this rock will be broken, but whoever it falls upon – it will completely break him asunder.
	45 And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his comparisons, they knew that he spoke about them, 46 and though they sought to seize him they feared the crowd, since they thought of him as a prophet.

RANTA 22 
Ar hanquentasse Yésus ata carampe téna sestielissen, quétala: 2 “Menelo aranie ná ve nér, aran, ye carne veryangweo meren yondoryan. 3 Ar mentanes núroryar yalien i náner yáline i veryangweo merendenna, mal ualte merne tule. 4 Ata mentanes hyane núroli, quétala: Nyara i yálinain: 'Yé, amanwien mattinya, mundonyar ar maitane celvanyar anaier nahtane, ar ilqua manwa ná! Tula i veryangweo merendenna!' 5 Mal ualte cimne ar oanter, quén véra restaryanna, quén mancaleryanna; 6 mal i exi, mápala núroryar, lenganer tien yaiwenen ar nacanter te.

CHAPTER 22
And in answer Jesus again spoke to them in comparisons, saying: 2 “The kingdom of heaven is like a man, a king, who made a feast of marriage for his son. 3 And he sent his servants to call those that were called to the feast of marriage, but they did not want to come. 4 Again he sent other servants, saying: Tell the ones invited: 'Behold, I have prepared my meal, my bulls and my fattened animals have been slaughtered, and everything is ready! Come to the feast of marriage!' 5 But they did not give heed and went off, one to his own field, one to his business; 6 but the others, seizing his servants, behaved towards them with scorn and killed them. 

	7 Mal i aran olle rúşea, ar mentanes hosseryar ar nancarne tane *nahtari ar urtane ostolta. 8 Tá quentes núroryannar: I veryangweo meren é manwa ná, mal i yálinar úner valde. 9 Etta mena i mallennar yar tulyar et i ostollo, ar yala aiquen ye hirilde i veryangweo merendenna. 10 Ar núror sine etelender ar comyaner illi i hirnelte, olcar ar mani véla, ar i şambe yasse carnelte i veryangweo meren náne quátina inen cainer ara i sarno. 

	7 But the king became angry, and he sent his armies and destroyed those murderers and burnt their city. 8 Then he said to his servants: The feast of marriage is indeed ready, but the ones called were not worthy. 9 Therefore go to the roads that lead out of the city, and call anyone that you find to the feast of marriage. 10 And these servants went out and gathered all that they found, wicked ones and good ones alike, and the room in which they made the feast of marriage was filled by those that lay at the table.

	11 Íre i aran túle minna yétien i caitalar ara i sarno, cennes nér ye úne netyana lanninen veryangweo. 12 Ar quentes senna: “Málo, manen túlel minna sir ú lannion veryangweo?” Sámes munta ya poldes quete. 13 Tá i aran quente núroryannar: 'Áse nute talusse ar mátse ar áse et-hate mir i mornie i ettesse; tasse nauvar i yaime ar i mulie nelciva.' 14 An rimbar nar yáline, mal mancar nar cíline!

	11 When the king came in to look at the ones lying at the table, he saw a man who was not adorned in clothes of marriage. 12 And he said to him: “Friend, how did you come in here without clothes of marriage?” He had nothing that he could say. 13 Then the king said to his servants: Bind him on feet and hands and throw him out into the darkness on the outside; there will be the wailing and the grinding of teeth.' 14 For numerous ones are called, but few are chosen!”

	15 Tá i Farisar lender ar carner panoli uo, rembien se questaryasse. 16 Ar mentanelte senna hildoltar as i Herolyar, i quenter: “*Peantar, istalme i nalye nanwa ar peanta Eruo malle nanwiesse, ar ualye cime aiquen, an ual yéta Atanion cendele. 17 Etta queta menna ya sanalye: Ma ná lávaina anta *tungwe i Ingaranen, hya lá?”18 Mal Yésus, istala ulculta, quente: “Manen ná i tyastalde ni, *imnetyandor? 19 Ánin tana telpemitta i *tungweo!” Tulunelte senna lenár. Ar quentes téna: “Mano emma ar tecie ná si?” 21 Quentelte: “I Ingarano!” Tá quentes téna: “Etta á paitya i Ingarano nati i Ingaranen, mal Eruo nati Erun!” 22 Ar íre hlasselte ta, anelte elmendasse, ar autala sello lendelte oa.

	15 Then the Pharisees went and made plans together, to trap him in his speech. 16 And they sent to him their disciples with the Herodians, that said: “Teacher, we know that you are true and teach God's way in truth, and you do not give heed to anyone [in particular], for you do not look at the face of Men. 17 Therefore say to us what you think: Is it allowed to give tax to the High King, or not? 18 But Jesus, knowing their evil, said: “How is [it] that you test me, hypocrites? 19 Show me a silver-piece of the tax!” They brought to him a denarius. And he said to them: “Whose picture and writing is this?” 21 They said: “The High King's!” Then he said to them: “Therefore pay the High King's things to the High King, but God's things to God!” 22 And when they heard that, they were in wonder, and going away from him they went off.

	23 Yana auresse túler senna Sanduceáli, i quetir i lá ea enortie, ar maquentelte senna: 24 “*Peantar, Móses quente: Qui aiquen quale ú hínion, mauya hánoryan verya veriryanna ar orta erde hánoryan. 25 Enger aselte hánor otso, ar i minya, apa veryanes nissenna, qualle; ar pan pennes hína, hehtanes verirya hánoryan. 26 I imya nat martane yú i attean ar i neldean, é tenna i ostean. 7 Ve i métima i nís qualle. 28 Tá man se-samuvas ve veri i enortiesse? An illi mici te sámer se!”

	23 In that day [there] came to him some Sadducees, that say that [there] is no resurrection, and they asked him: 24 “Teacher, Moses said: If anyone dies without children, it is necessary for his brother to marry his wife and raise up seed to his brother. 25 [There] were with us seven brothers, and the first, after he got married to a woman, died; and since he lacked [any] child, he left his wife for his brother. 26 The same thing happened also to the second and to the third, indeed until the seventh. 7 As the last the woman died. 28 Then who will have her as wife in the resurrection? For all among them had her!”

	29 Hanquentasse Yésus quente téna: “Loitalde, pan ualde ista i Tehteler ar Eruo túre véla. 30 An i enortiesse ualte verya exennar hya nar vertane, mal nalte ve menelo vali. 31 Mal pa i enortie qualinaron, ma ualte hentane ya náne quétina lenna lo Eru, íre quentes: 32 Inye Avrahámo Aino ar Ísaco Aino ar Yácovo Aino – ? Uas qualinaron Aino, mal coirearon!” 33 Hlárala ta, i şangar náner quátine elmendanen peantieryanen.

	29 In answer Jesus said to them: “You err, since you do not know the Scriptures and God's power alike. 30 For in the resurrection they do not get married to others or are married off, but they are like the angels of heaven. 31 But concerning the resurrection [or, re-rising] of the dead, did you not read what was said to you by God, when he said: 32 I [am] Abraham's God and Isaac's God and Jacob's God  – ? He is not the God of dead ones, but of living ones!” 33 Hearing that, the crowds were filled with wonder at [-nen] his teaching.

	34 Íre i Farisar hlasser manen pustanes anto i Sandúcearon, ocomnelte uo. 35 Ar quén imíca te, *şanyengolmo, maquente tyastien se: 36 “*Peantar, mana i antúra axan i Şanyesse?” 37 Quentes senna: “Alye mele i Héru Ainolya quanda endalyanen ar quanda fealyanen ar quanda sámalyanen. 38 Ta ná i antúra ar minya axan. 39 I attea vávea ná: Alye mele armarolya ve imle. 40 Sine nát i axan atta yanten i quanda Şanye linga, ar i Erutercánor!”

	34 When the Pharisees heard how he stopped the mouth of the Sadducees, they gathered together. 35 And one among them, a lawyer, asked to test him: 36 “Teacher, what is the greatest commandment in the Law?” 37 He said to him: “'You shall love the Lord your God with your whole heart and your whole soul and your whole mind.' 38 That is the greatest and first commandment. 39 The second one is similar: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. 40 These are [dual] the two commandments by which [-nten, dual instrumental] the entire Law hangs, and the Prophets!”

	41 Sí lan i Farisar aner comyane Yésus maquente téna: 42 “Mana sanalde pa i Hristo? Mano yondo náse?” Quentelte senna: “Laviro!” 43 Quentes téna: “Manen, tá, lerta Lavir i Fairenen esta se Heru, quétala: 44 I Héru quente herunyanna: Hara ara formanya tenna panyan ñottolyar nu talulyat – ? 45 Qui, tá, Lavir esta se Heru, manen náse yondorya?” 46 Ar ence úquenen hanquete senna erya quetta; ente, lá enge aiquen ye veryane maquete senna ambe.

	41 Now while the Pharisees were gathered Jesus said to them: 42 “What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him: “David's!” 43 He said to them: “How, then, may David by the Spirit call him Lord, saying: 44 The Lord said to my lord: Sit by my right hand until I place your enemies under your feet'– ? 45 If, then, David calls him Lord, how is he his son?” 46 And nobody was able to say to him a single word; furthermore, [there] was not anyone who dared to ask him [anything] [any]more.

RANTA 23
Tá Yésus carampe i şangannar ar i hildonnar, quétala: 2 “I parmangolmor ar Farisar hárar Móseo hammasse. 3 Etta á care ar himya ilye i nati yar nyarilte len, mal áva care ve cardaltar, an quetiltes, mal uar care. 4 Nutilte lunge cólar ar panyar tai quenion pontesse, mal té uar mere appa tai lepereltanen. 5 Ilye carieltar carilte náven cénine lo atani, an carilte *colcalleltar palle ar laniltar hoe. 9 Melilte same i amminde nómi mattissen ar i minye hammar i *yomencoassen, 7 ar came *suilier i mancalenómessen ar náve estaina Ravi lo atani. 8 Mal elde, áva lave aiquenen esta le Ravi, an er ná *peantarelda, mal illi mici lé nar hánor.

CHAPTER 23
Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to the disciples, saying: 2 “The scribes and the Pharisees are sitting on the chair of Moses. 3 Therefore do and keep all the things that they tell you, but to do do according to their deeds, for they say it, but do not perform. 4 They bind heavy burdens and put them on people's back, but they do not wish to touch them with their finger. 5 All their doings they do in order to be seen by men, for they make their phylacteries [*colcaller, little boxes] broad and their fringes broad. 9 They love to have the most prominent places at meals and the first seats in the synagogues, 7 and to receive greetings in the market-places and to be called Rabbi by men. 8 But you, do not allow anyone to call you Rabbi, for one is your teacher, but all among you are brothers.

9 Ente, áva esta aiquen cemende atarelda, an samilde erya Atar, i meneldea. 10 Ar áva na estaine *tulyandor, an samilde erya *Tulyando, i Hristo. 11 Mal yen ná i antúra mici le mauya náve núrolda. 12 Ye orta inse nauva nucumna, ar ye nucumne inse nauva ortaina. 
	13 Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor! An holtalde Eruo aranie epe Atani, an elde uar lelya minna, ar i lelyar minna pustalde! [14]
	15 Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor! An lelyalde olla ear yo nor querien erya quén savieldanna, ar íre acámies sa, carildes valda Ehennan lú atta ambe epe lé.

9 Furthermore, do not call anyone on earth your father, for you have a single Father, the heavenly one. 10 And do not be called leaders, for you have a single Leader, the Christ. 11 But for [the one] who is the greatest among you it is necessary to be your servant. 12 [The one] who exalts himself will be humbled, and [the one] that humbles himself will be exalted. 
	13 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you close God's kingdom before Men, for you do not go inside, and [the ones] that go inside you stop! [14]
	15 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel across sea and land to turn a single person to your faith, and when he has received it, you make him worthy of [-n] Gehenna two times more than you. 

	16 Horro len, *cénelóre *tulyandor, i quetir: 'Qui aiquen anta vandarya i cordanen, ta ná munta, mal qui aiquen anta vandarya i cordo maltanen, náse nauta.' 17 Aucor ar *cénelórar! An mana i ambe túra, i malta hya i corda ya airita i malta? 18 Yando quetilde: 'Qui aiquen anta vandarya i *yangwanen, ta ná munta; mal qui aiquen anta vandarya i annanen sasse, náse nauta.' 19 *Cénelórar! An mana i ambe tura, i anna hya i *yangwa ya airita i anna? 20 Etta ye anta vandarya i *yangwanen care sie sánen ar ilye i natinen sasse, 21 ar ye anta vandarya i cordanen care sie sánen ar sénen ye mare sasse, 22 ar ye anta vandarya menelden care sie Eruo mahalmanen ar yenen hára sasse! 
	
	16 Woe to you, blind leaders, that say: 'If anyone gives his oath by the temple, that is nothing, but if anyone gives his oath by the gold of the temple, he is obliged.' 17 Fools and blind ones! For what is the greater, the gold or the temple that hallows the gold? 18 Also you say: 'If anyone gives his oath by the altar, that is nothing, but if anyone gives his oath by the gift on it, he is obliged.' 19 Blind ones! For what is the greater, the gift or the altar that hallows the gift? 20 Therefore [the one] who gives his oath by the altar does so by it and by all the things on it, 21 and [the one] who gives his oath by the temple does so by it and by he that dwells in it, 22 and [the one] who gives his oath by heaven [menel-nen > menelden] does so by God's throne and by [the one] who is sitting on it!

23 Horro len, parmagolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor! An antalde i quaista i minto ar i lillo ar i  cúmino, mal ehehtielde i ambe valdie nati i Şanyesse: failie ar óravie ar voronwie. Mauyane care nati sine, ananta lá hehta i exi. 24 *Cénelórar, i *saltar i pí, mal ammatir i ulumpe!
	25 Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor, an poitalde ette i yulmo ar i veneo, mal i mityasse nalte quante pilweo ar peniéno *immoturiéva. 26 *Cénelóra Farisa, á poita minyave i mitya i yulmo ar i veneo, yando etteryo náven poica! 

23 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you give the tenth of i mint and the dill and the cumin, but you have abandoned the more important things in the Law: justice and mercy and faithfulness. It was necessary to do these things, and yet not abandon the others. 24 Blind ones, that strain out the gnat [pí: small insect], but devour the camel!
	25 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you cleans [the] outside of the cup and the dish, but on the inside they are full of plunder and lack of self-control. 26 Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and the dish, for its outside to be clean as well! 

	27 Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor, an nalde ve ninquinte sapsar, yar é *şéyar vanye i ettesse, mal i mityasse nalte quante axoinen qualinion ar ilya nostalénen úpoitiéva. 28 Mi sana lé yando elde i ettesse nemir faile atanin, mal i mityasse nalde quante *imnetyaleo ar *şanyelóriéno.
	29 Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor, an caraste i *Erutercánoron sapsar ar netyar i failaron noiri, 30 ar quetilde: “Qui engelve auressen atarilvaron, ualve sáme ranta aselte i *Erutercánoron sercesse!” 31 Sie *vettalde indenna i nalde yondor ion nacanter i *Erutercánor! 32 Yando elde, tá, quata atarildaron lesta! 

	27 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you are like whitened graves, which indeed seem beautiful on the outside, but on the inside they are full of bones of dead ones and every kind of uncleanness. 28 In that manner you as well on the outside seem just to men, but on the inside you are full of hypocricy and lawlessness.
	29 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you build the graves of the Prophets and adorn the tombs of the just, 30 and you say: “If we existed in our father's days, we did not have [any] part with them in the blood of the Prophets!” 31 Thus you witness against yourselves that you are sons of [the ones] that killed the Prophets! 32 You too, then, fill your fathers' measure!

	33 Leucar, vembion hín, manen uşuvalde Ehenno námiello? 34 Etta, yé! inye mentea lenna *Erutercánoli ar sailali ar parmangolmoli. Queneli mici te nahtuvalde ar tarwestuvalde, ar queneli mici te riptuvalde *yomencoaldassen ar roituvaldet ostollo ostonna, 35 ar sie tuluva lenna ilya faila serce *etulyana cemende, sercello faila Avelo sercenna Sacarío Varaciaion, ye nacantelde imbi i yána ar i *yangwa. 36 Násie quetin lenna: Ilye nati sine tuluvar *nónare sinanna!
	37 Yerúsalem, Yerúsalem, ye nahta i *Erutercánor ar *sarya i nar mentaine senna – manen rimbave mernen comya hínalyar, ve poroce comya nessaryar nu rámaryat! Mal ualde merne. 38 Yé! Coalda ná len hehtana! 39 An quetin lenna: Ho sí ualde ni-cenuva tenna quetuvalde: Aistana ná ye túla i Héruo essenen!”  

	23 Serpents, brood of worms, how will you escape from the judgment of Gehenna? 34 Therefore, behold! I am sending to you prophets and wise ones and scribes. Some among them you will kill and you will crucify, and some among them you will flay in your synagogues and you will pursue them from city to city, 35 and so there will come upon you all righteous blood poured forth on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Barakiah, whom you slew between the sanctuary and the altar. 36 Truly I say to you: All these things will come upon this generation!
	37 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, [she] that slays the prophets and stones those that are sent to her – how frequently I wished to gather your children, as a hen gathers her young under her wings [dual]! But you did not want to. 38 Behold! Your house is left to you! 39 And I say to you: From now you will not see me until you say: 'Blessed is he that is coming in the name of the Lord.'”

RANTA 24 
Autala, Yesus lende oa, mal hildoryar túler senna tanien sen i cordo ataqui. 2 Hanquentasse quentes téna: “Ma ualde cene ilye sine nati? Násie quetin lenna: Sisse ondo laume lemyuva to ondo ya ua nauva hátina undu!”
	3 Íre hamnes Orontesse *Milloaldaron, i hildor túler senna íre anelte erinque, quétala: “Nyara men: Mana i lúme yasse nati sine martuvar, ar mana nauva i tanwa entulesselyo ar i tyeldo i rando?”
	4 Hanquentasse Yésus quente téna: “Á yéta in *úquen tyare le ranya, 5 an rimbali tuluvar essenyanen, quétala: 'Inye i Hristo ná!', ar tyaruvalte rimbali ranya. 6 Hlaruvalde pa ohtali ar camuvar sinyali ohtalion; cima in ualde ruhtane! Maurenen martuvas, mal i metta en ua utúlie. 

CHAPTER 24
Leaving, Jesus went away, but his disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple. 2 In answer he said to them: “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you: Here a stone will by no means remain on a stone that will not be thrown down!”
	3 When he sat on the Mounts of Olives, the disciples came to him when they were alone, saying: “Tell us: What is the time when these things will happen, and what will be the sign of your return and the conclusion of the age?”
	4 In answer Jeuss said to them: “See that nobody causes you to err [ranya = stray], 5 for numerous ones will come in [or “by”, -nen] my name, saying: 'I am the Christ!', and they will cause many to err. 6 You will hear about wars and will receive news of wars; take heed, that you are not terrified. By necessity it will happen, but the end still has not come.

	7 An nóre ortuva nórenna ar aranie aranienna, ar euvar saiceléli ar *cempaliéli rimbe nómelissen. 8 Ilye nati sine nar yesta naicelion.
	9 Tá queneli antauvar le olla mir şangie ar nahtuvar le, ar nauvalde tévaine lo ilye i nóri castanen essenyo. 10 Ar tá rimbali lantuvar oa ar *vartuvar quén i exe ar tevuvar quén i exe. 11 Ar rimbe *hurutercánoli ortuvar ar tyaruvar rimbali ranya, 12 ar pan i *şanyelórie ale, melme oluva ringa i ambe rimbe quenissen. 13 Mal ye perpere i mettanna, isse nauva rehtana. 14 Ar i evandilyon i araniéno nauva carna sinwa i quanda ambaresse ve *vettie ilye i nórin, ar tá i metta tuluva.

	7 For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and [there] will be famines and earthquakes in numerous places. 8 All these things are a beginning of pains.
	9 Then people will give you over into tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations by reason of my name. 10 And then numerous ones will fall away and will betray one another and will hate one another. 11 And many false prophets will arise and will cause many to err, 12 and since the lawlessness grows, love will become cold in the greater number of people. 13 But [he] who endures until the end, he will be saved. 14 And the gospel of the kingdom will be made known in the entire world as a witness for all the nations, and then the end will come.

	15 Etta, íre cenilde i Faica Nat Nancariéva, pa ya Laniel i Erutercáno carampe, tárala aire nómesse” – lava yen hentea hanya – 16 “tá mauya in nar Yureasse uşe i orontinnar. 17 Nér i tópasse áva lelya undu talien armaryar et coaryallo, 18 ar nér i restasse áva nanwene coaryanna leptien collarya. 19 Horro i *lapsarwain ar i *tyetir vinimo ente auressen! 20 Hyama i *lercielda ua martuva hrívesse hya i *sendaresse, 21 an tá euva túra şangie, ve ua amartie i mardo yestallo tenna sí, ar ua martuva ata. 22 Qui ente auri úner nuhtane, ua enge hráve nála rehtana, mal i cílinaron márien, ente auri nauvar nuhtane. 
	23 Tá, qui aiquen quete lenna: 'Ela! Sisse ná i Hristo!', hya 'Tasse!', ávasa save. 24 An *huruhristoli ar *hurutercánoli ortuvar ar antauvar túre tanwali ar elmendali, tyarien yando i cílinar ranya, qui tá náne cárima. 25 Yé, len-anyárien nóvo.

15 Therefore, when you see the Disgusting Thing of Destruction, of which Daniel the Prophet spoke, standing in a holy place” – let [the one] who is reading understand – 16 “then it is necessary for [those] who are in Judea escape to the mountains. 17 A man on the roof is not to go down to bring his goods out of his house, 18 and a man in the field is not to return to his house to pick up his cloak. 19 Woe to the pregnant women and [those] that suckle a baby in those days! 20 Pray that your flight will not happen in winter or on the sabbath, 21 for then there will be a great tribulation, as has not happened from the beginning of the earth until now, and will not happen again. 22 If those days were not shortened, there was not [any] flesh being saved, but for the good for the chosen ones, those days will be shortened.
	23 Then, if anyone says to you: 'Look! Here is the Christ!', or 'There!', do not believe it [-sa]. 24 For false Christs and false prophets will rise up and will give great signs and wonders, to cause also the chosen ones to stray, if that was [/were/had been] possible. 25 Behold, I have told you beforehand.

	26 Etta, qui queni quetir lenna: 'Yé! Náse i erumasse!', áva lelya tar. Qui quetilte: 'Yé, náse i mitye şambessen!', ávasa save! 27 An ve i íta hundiéva ettule Rómello ar calta Númenna, sie euva i Atanyondo tulesse! 28 I nóme yasse i quelet ea, tasse i şorni ocomuvar!
	29 Ron apa i şangie mi ente rí, Anar oluva morna, ar Işil ua antuva işilmerya, ar i tinwi lantuvar menello, ar menelo túri nauvar pálaine. 30 Ar tá i tanwa i Atanyondova nauva cénina menelde, ar tá ilye nossi cemeno palpuvar inte nainiesse, ar cenuvalte i Atanyondo túla menelo fanyassen arwa túreo ar olya alcaro; 31 ar mentauvas valaryar taura rómanen, ar comyauvalte cílinaryar et i súrillon canta, menelo rénallo hyana rénaryanna.

	26 Therefore, if people say to you: 'Behold! He is in the wilderness!', do not go thither. If they say: 'Behold, he is in the inner rooms!', do not believe it! 27 For as when the flash of thunder comes out from [the] east and shines to [the] west, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man! 28 The place where the corpse is, there the eagles will gather!
	29 Soon after the tribulation in those days, the Sun will bcome dark, and the Moon will not give his sheen, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven will be being shaken. 30 And then the sign of the Son of Man will be seen in heaven, and then all tribes [or families, houses] of the earth will beat themselves in lamentation, and they shall see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven having power and much glory; 31 and he will send his angels with a mighty trumpet-blast, and they will gather his chosen ones out of the four winds, from heaven's border to its other border.

	32 Sí para sestie sina i *relyávaldanen: Íre olvarya ole musse ar tuias lasseryar, istalde i laire hare ná. 33 Sie yando elde, íre cenilde ilye nati sine, istar i náse hare, epe i fendi. 34 Násie quetin lenna i laume autuva *nónare sina nó ilye nati sine martar. 35 Menel cemenye autuvat, mal ninye quettar uar autuva.
	36 Pa ré ar lúme enta úquen ista, lá i vali menelde ar lá i Yondo, mal i Atar erinqua. 37 An ve réryar Noaħ náner, sie euva mí Atanyondo tulesse. 38 An tambe anelte yane auressen nó i Oloire, matila ar sucila, veryala ar nála vertane, tenna i aure ya Noaħ lende mir i marcirya, 39 ar hanyanelte munta tenna i Oloire túle ar colde te illi oa, síve i Atanyondo tulesse euva.

	32 Now learn this comparison from [-nen, by] the fig tree: When its branch becomes soft and it sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. 33 Thus you as well, when you see all these things, know that he is near, before the doors. 34 Truly I say to you that this generation shall by no means pass away before all these things happen. 35 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words will not pass away.
	36 Of that day and hour nobody knows, not the angels in heaven and not the Son, but the Father alone. 37 For as the days of Noah were, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 38 For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, marrying and being married off, until the day that Noah went into the ark; 39 and they understood nothing until the Flood came and carried them off, so the coming of the Son of Man will be.

40 Tá nér atta euvat er restasse: Qúen nauva talana ar i exe nauva hehtana. 41 Nís atta muluvat i imya *mulmanen: quén nauva talana ar i exe nauva hehtana. 42 Etta na cuive, an ualde ista mi mana ré Herulda tuluva. 
	43 Mal á ista si: Qui i *coantur sinte mi mana tiresse i arpo tuluva, anes cuiva ar ua láve aiquenen race mir coarya. 44 Etta yando elde na manwe, an i Atanyondo tuluva mi lúme yasse ualde sana sie.
	45 Man ná i voronda ar saila mól ye herurya panyane or coaryo queni, antaven tien matta i vanima lúmesse? 46 Valima ná mól tana qui herurya, íre hé tule, hire se cára sie. 47 Násie quetin lenna: Hé panyuva se or ilqua ya hé same.

40 Then two men shall be in one field: One will be brought [along] and the other will be abandoned. 41 Two women will grind with the same mill; one will be brought [along] and the other will be abandoned. 42 Therefore be awake, for you do not know what day your Lord will come.
	43 But know this: If the master of the house knew in what watch the thief will come, he was [or, would be] awake and did not allow anyone to break into his house. 44 Therefore you as well be ready, for the Son of Man will come in an hour when you do not think so.
	45 Who is the faithful and wise thrall whom his lord put over the people of his house, to give them food in the proper hour? 46 Happy is that thrall if his lord, when he comes, finds him doing so. 47 Truly I say to you: He will put him over everything that he has.

48 Mal qui tana ulca mól quetuva endaryasse: 'Herunya ná telwa', 49 ar *yestuvas palpa i hyane móli ar sucuva as i quatir inte limpenen, 50 tá tana mólo heru tuluva auresse ya uas apacene ar lúmesse ya uas ista, 51 ar se-paimetuvas naraca lénen ar antauva sen i imya metta ya i *imnetyandor camir. Tasse euvar níreryar ar mulierya nelciva.

48 But if that evil slave will say in his heart: 'My lord is late', 49 and he will begin to beat the other slaves and drink with [those] that fill themselves with wine, 50 then the lord of that slave will come on a day that he does not foresee and in an hour that he does not know, 51 and he will punish him in a harsh manner and will give him the same end that the hypocrites receive. There will be his tears and his grinding of teeth.

RANTA 25  
Tá menelo aranie nauva ve vendi quean i taller calmaltar ar lender ettenna velien i ender. 2 Lempe mici te náner alasaile, ar lempe náner saile. 2 An i aucar namper calmaltar mal uar talle millo aselte, 4 íre i sailar namper millo olpeltassen as calmaltar. 5 Íre i ender náne telwa, illi mici té náner lorde ar húmer. 6 Endesse i lómio enge yáme: 'Yé i ender! Mena se-velien!' 

CHAPTER 25
Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten maidens that brought their lamps and went outside to meet the bridegroom. 2 Five among them were unwise, and five were wise. 2 For the foolish ones took their lamps but did not bring oil with them, 4 while the wise ones brought oil in their bottles with their lamps. 5 When the bridegroom was late, all among them were slumberous and slept. 6 In the middle of the night [there] was a cry: “Behold the bridegroom! Go to meet him!”

7 Tá ilye tane vendi oronter ar manwaner calmaltar. 8 I alasailar quenter i sailannar: 'Ámen anta et milloldo, an calmalmar ron nauvar *luhtyane!' 9 I sailar hanquenter: “Cé i millo ua faryuva men ar len. I mende mena ar á *homanca elden!” 10 Apa oantelte *homancien, i ender túle, ar i vendi i náner manwe lende óse i merendenna veryangweo, ar i fenna náne holtana. 11 Epeta i hyane vendi yando túler, quétala: 'Heru, heru, ámen latya!' 12 Hanquentasse eques: 'Násie quetin lenna, uan ista le!'
	13 Etta cima, an ualde ista i aure hya i lúme. 14 An i natto ná ve íre nér ye lelyumne hyana nórenna tultane mólyar ar antaner armaryar mir hepielta. 15 Ar quenen mici te antanes talenti lempe, exen atta, exen er – ve fintielta. Tá lendes oa.

7 Then all those maidens arose and prepared their lamps. 8 The unwise ones said to the wise ones: 'Give us of out of your oil, for our lambs will soon be extinguished!” 9 The wise ones answered: 'Maybe the oil will not suffice for us and for you. Instead go and buy for yourselves!' 10 After they went away to buy, the bridegroom came, and the maidens that were ready went with him to the feast of marriage, and the door was closed. 11 Afterwards the other maidens also came, saying: 'Lord, lord, open for us!' 12 In answer he said: 'Truly I say to you, I do not know you!'
	13 Therefore take heed, for you do not know the day or the hour. 14 For the matter is like when a man who was going to travel to another country summoned his thralls and gave his goods into their keeping. 15 And to one among them he gave five talents, to another two, to another one – according to their skill. Then he went away.

16 Lintiénen ye camne i talenti lempe lende oa ar mancane tainen, ar ñentes an lempe. 17 Mí imya lé ye camne i atta ñente an atta. 18 Mal ye camne i er, oante ar sampe i talamesse ar nurtane i telpe heruryava.
	19 Apa anda lúme i heru sane mólion túle ar sáme onótie aselte. 20 Ar túlala ompa, ye camne i talenti lempe talle an talenti lempe, quétala: “Heru, antanel talenti lempe mir hepienya. Ela, eñétien an talenti lempe!” 21 Herurya quente senna: “Mai carna, mára ar voronda mól! Anel voronda or nótime natali. Panyuvan lye or rimbe natali. Tula mir herulyo alasse!”
	22 Yú ye camne i talent atta túle ompa ar quente: “Heru, talent atta antanel mir hepienya. Ela, eñétiel an talent atta!” 23 Herurya quente senna: “Mai carna, mára ar voronda mól!  Anel voronda or nótime natali. Panyuvan lye or rimbe natali. Tula mir herulyo alasse!”

Quickly [he] that received the five talents went away and traded with them, and he gained another five. 17 In the same manner [he] who received the two gained another two. 18 But [he] that received the one, went off and dug in the ground and hid the money of his lord.
	19 After a long time the lord of those thralls came and had a reckoning with them. 20 And coming forward, [he] that received thmattme five talents brought another five talents, saying: “Lord, you gave five talents into my keeping. Behold, I have gained another five talents!” 21 His lord said to him: “Well done, good and faithful thrall! You were faithful over a few things. I will put you over many things. Come into the joy of your lord!”
	22 Also [he] who received the two talents came forward and said: “Lord, two talents you gave into my keeping. Behold, I have gained another two talents!” 23 His lord said to him: “Well, done, good and faithful thrall! You were faithful over a few things. I will put you over many things. Come into your the joy of your lord!”

	24 I mettasse ye camne i er talent túle ompa ar quente: “Heru, istan i nalye naraca nér, *cirihtala yasse ual rende ar comyala yasse ual vintane. 25 Etta anen ruhtaina ar oante ar nurtane talentelya i talamesse. Sisse samil ya *lyenya ná!” 26 Hanquentasse eques: “Olca ar lenca mól, tá sintel i *cirihtan yasse uan rende ar comyan yasse uan vintane? 27 Etta mauyane lyen panya telpenya as i *sarnomor, ar íre túlen ence nin came ya ninya né as napánina telpe!
	28 Etta alde mapa i talent sello ar ása anta yen same i talenti quean! 29 An ilquenen ye same, amba nauva antana ar samuvas úve, mal ye ua same – yando ya samis nauva mapana sello! 30 Ar alde hate i *alamára mól mir i mornie i ettesse! Tasse euvar níreryar ar molierya nelciva.

	24 In the end [he] that received the one talent came forward and said: “Lord, I know that you are a harsh man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not scatter. 25 Therefore I was terrified and went off and hid your talent in the ground. Here you have what is yours!” 26 In answer he said: “Wicked and dull thrall, then you knew that I reap where I did not sow and gather where I did not scatter? 27 Therefore it was necessary for you to put my money with the bankers, and when I came I could receive what was mine with added money [= interest]. 
	28 Therefore you [pl.] are to take the talent from him and give it to the one that has the ten talents! 29 For to everyone that has, more will be given and he will have abundance, but [he] that does not have – also what he has will be taken from him! 30 And you [pl.] are to throw the no-good thrall into the darkness on the outside! There will be his tears and his grinding of teeth.

	31 Mal íre i Atanyondo tuluva alcareryasse, ar ilye i vali óse, tá hamuvas undu alcarinqua mahalmaryasse. 32 Ar ilye i nóri nauvar comyane epe se, ar te-*ciltuvas quén i exello, ve íre mavar *cilta i mámar i nyénillon. 33 Ar panyuvas mámaryar ara formarya, mal i nyénir ara hyarmarya.
	34 Tá i aran quetuva innar tárar foryaryasse: 'Tula, le i nar aistane lo Atarinya, á harya i aranie manwana len tulciello mardeva! 35 An anen maita ar antanelde nin matta; anen soica, ar antanelde nin nat sucien; anen ettelea ar camnelde ni, 36 helda, ar tumpelde ni. Anen hlaiwa ar *cimbanelde ni, anen mandosse ar túlelde ninna.' 37 Tá i failar hanquetuvar senna sie: 'Heru, mana i lú ya cennelme lye maita ar antaner lyen matta, hya soica, ar antane lyen nat sucien? 38 Mana i lú ya cennelme lye ve ettelea quén ar camner lye, hya helda, ar tumper lye? 39 Mana i lú ya cennelme lye hlaiwa hya mandosse ar túler lyenna?'  40 Ar hanquentasse i aran quetuva téna: 'Násie quetin lenna: I lestasse ya carnelde ta quenen mici ampitye hánonyar sine, mí imya lesta inyen carneldes.'

	31 But when the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. 32 And all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate them one from the other, as when a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. 33 And he will put his sheep at [ara = beside] his right hand, but the goats at his left hand. 
	34 Then the king will say to [those] that are standing to his right: 'Come, you who are blessed by my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world! 35 For I was hungry and you gave he food; I was thirsty, and you gave me something to drink; I was a stranger, and you received me, 36 naked, and you covered me. I was sick and you cared for me, I was in prison and you came to me.' 37 Then the just ones will answer him so: 'Lord, what [was] the time that we saw you hungry and gave you food, or thisty, and gave you something to drink? 38 What [was] the time that we saw you as a foreign person and received you, or naked, and covered you? 39 What [was] the time that we saw you sick or in prison and came to you?' 40 And in answer the king will say to them: 'Truly I say to you: In the measure [= to the extent] that you did that to one among these smallest brothers of mine, in the same measure to me you did it.'

	41 Tá quetuvas yú innar tárar hyaryaryasse: 'Á auta nillo, elde i nar húne lo Atarinya, mir i oira náre ya anaie manwana i Araucon ar valaryain! 42 Anen maita, ar antanelde nin munta matien, anen soica ar antanelde nin munta sucien, 43 anen ettelea ar ualde camne ni, helda ar ualde tumper ni, hlaiwa ar mandosse, mal ualde *cimbane ni.' 44 Tá yú té hanquetuvar, quétala: 'Heru, mana i lú ya cennelme lye maita hya soica hya ettelea hya helda hya hlaiwa hya mandosse, ar ualme *veuyane len?' 45 Tá hanquetuvas lenna sie: 'Násie quetin lenna: I lestasse ya loitanelde care sie quenen mici sine ampityar, mí imya lesta loitanelde caritas inyen.' 46 Ar autuvalte mir oira paime, mal i failar, mir oira coivie.

	41 Then he will say also to [the ones] that are standing at his right: 'Pass from me, you that are accursed by my Father, into the eternal fire that has been prepared for the Devil and his angels! 42 I was hungry, and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink, 42 I was a stranger and you did not receive me, naked and you did not cover me, sick and in prison, but you did not care for me.' 44 Then they as well will answer, saying: 'Lord, what was the time that we saw you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and we did not serve you?' 45 Then he will answer them so: 'Truly I say to you: In the measure that you failed to do so to one among these smallest ones, in the same measure you failed to do it for me.' 46 And they will go off into eternal punishment, but the just ones, into eternal life.

RANTA 26 
Ar apa Yésus telyane ilye quetier sine, quentes hildoryannar: 2 “Istalde i aure atta ho sí i *Lahtale tuluva, ar i Atanyondo nauva antana olla náven tarwestana!”
	3 Tá i hére *airimor ar i amyárar imíca i lie ocomner i pacasse i héra *airimóva, yeo esse náne Caiafas, 4 ar carner panoli uo mapien Yésus curunen ar nahtien se. 5 Mal quentelte: “Lá i aşaresse, hya euva amortie imíca i lie!”
	6 Íre Yésus enge Vetaniasse, mi coarya Símon Helmahlaiwa, 7 nís arwa ondocolco quanta níşima millo túle senna, ar sa-ulyanes caryanna íre caines ara i sarno. 8 Cénala ta, i hildor náner rusce ar quenter: “Mana i casta hatien oa i millo? An mo polde vacitas hoa nóten, antaven sa penyain!” 

CHAPTER 26
And after Jesus completed all these sayings, he said to his disciples: 2 “You know that two days from now the Passover will come, and the Son of Man will be given over to be crucified!”
	3 Then the chief priests and the elders among the people gathered in the courtyard of the chref priest, whose name was Caiaphas, 2 and made plans together to seize Jesus by cunning and to kill him. 5 But they said: “Not at the festival, or [there] will be an uprising among the people!”
	6 When Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the Leper, 7 a woman having a stone-box full of fragrant oil came to him, and she poured it on his head when he lay at the table. 8 Seeing that, the disciples were wroth and said: “What is the reason for throwing away the oil? For one could sell it for a great sum, to give it to [the] poor!”

	9 Istala si, Yésus quente téna: “Manen ná i cáralde *tarastie i nissen, íre acáries mára carda nin? 11 An i penyar samilde illume mici le, mal ualde illume samuva ni. 12 An íre nís sina panyane níşima millo sina hroanyasse, carneses ni-manwien i noirin. 13 Násie quetin lenna: Quiquie evandilyon sina nauva carna sinwa i quanda mardesse, ya nís sina carne yando nauva nyárina enyalien sé!”
	14 Tá quén imíca i yunque, isse yeo esse náne Yúras, lende i hére *airimonnar 15 ar quente: “Mana antauvalde nin qui antanyes olla len?” Ar panyanelte telpemittar *nelequean epe se. 16 Ar cestanes manen antauvanes hé olla íre ence sen.
	17 Minya auresse *Alapalúne Massaron i hildor túler Yésunna, quétala: “Masse meril i manwalme lyen, matielyan i Lahtie?” 18 Quentes téna: “Mena mir i osto ana sie-yo-sie ar queta senna: I Peantar quete: 'Lúmenya hare ná; coalyasse caruvan i Lahtie as hildonyar.'” 19 Ar i hildor carner ve Yésus canne tien, ar manwanelte i Lahtien.

	9 Knowing this, Jesus said to them: “How is [it] that you are making trouble for the woman, when she has done a good deed to me? 11 For the poor you have always among you, but you will not always have me. 12 For when this woman put this fragrant oil on my body, she did it to prepare me for the tomb. 13 Truly I say to you: Wherever this gospel will be made known in the entire world, what this woman did will also be told in memory of her!”
	14 Then one among the twelve, he whose name was Judas, went to the chief priests 15 and said: “What will you give me if I give him over to you?” And they put thirty silver pieces before him. 16 And he sought how he was going to give him over when it was possible for him.
	17 On the first day of Unleavened Breads the disciples came to Jesus, saying: “Where do you wish that we prepare for you, for you to eat the Passover?” 18 He said to them: “Go into the city to so-and-so and say to him: The teacher says: 'My time is near; in your house I will make the Passover with my disciples!” 19 And the disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and they prepared the Passover.

	20 Íre şinye túle, caines ara i sarno as i hildor yunque. Íre mátanelte, quentes: “Násie quetin lenna: Quén imíca le antauva ni olla!” 22 Núra nairesse ilya quén mici te *yestane quete senna:  “Lau inye ná sé, Heru?” 23 Hanquentasse eques: “Ye sumba márya asinye i salpesse ná ye antauva ni olla. 24 I Atanyondo é autuva, ve ná técina pa sé, mal horro i neren lo ye i Atanyondo antane olla ná! Náne arya tana neren qui únes nóna!” 25 Hanquentasse Yúras, ye antauvane se olla, quente: “Lau inye ná sé, Rappi?” Quentes senna: “Elye equétie sa!” 
	
	20 When evening came, he lay at the table with the twelve disciples. While they were eating, he said: “Truly I say to you: One among you will give me over!” 22 In deep grief every one among them began to say to him: 'Surely I am not he, Lord?'” 23 In answer he said: “[He] who dips his hand with me in the bowl is [the one] who will give me over. 24 The Son of Man will indeed pass away, as is written about him, but woe to the man by whom the Son of Man is given over! [It] was better for that man if he was not born!” 25 In answer Judas, who was going to betray him, said: “Surely I am not he, Rabbi?” He said to him: “You have said it!”
	
26 Lan mátanelte, Yésus nampe massa, ar apa quetie aistie ranceses, ar antala sa hildoryain quentes: “Ása mapa, mata! Si hroanya ná!”  27 Ar nampes yulma, ar apa antave hantale sa-antanes tien, quétala: “Suca et sallo, illi mici le! 28 An si ná sercenya i véreo, ya nauva etulyaina rá rimbalin apsenien úcariva. 29 Mal quetin lenna: Laume sucuvan sina yávello i liantasseo tenna enta aure yasse sucuvanyes vinya aselde Atarinyo araniesse!” 30 Ar apa lindie i *airilíri etelendelte Orontenna *Milloaldaron.

26 While they were eating, Jesus took a bread, and after speaking a blessing he broke it, and giving it to his disciples he said: “Take it, eat! This is my body!” 27 And he took a cup, and after giving thanks he gave it to them, saying: “Drink of it, all among you! 28 For this is my blood of the covenant, which will be poured forth on behalf of numerous ones for forgiveness of sins. 29 But I say to you: I will by no means drink of this fruit of the vine until that day when I shall drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom!” 30 And after singing the hymns they went out to the Mount of Olives.

	31 Tá Yésus quente téna: “Illi mici le lantuvar oa nillo lóme sinasse, an ná técina: 'Petuvan i mavar, ar i lamáreo mámar nauvar vintane.' 32 Mal apa návenya ortana, lelyuvan epe le mir Alilea!” 33 Mal hanquentasse Péter quente senna: “Qui illi lantuvar oa lello, inye ua oi lantuva oa!” 34 Yésus quente senna: “Násie quetin lenna: Lóme sinasse, nó tocot lamyuva, ni-laquetuval nel!” 35 Péter quente senna: “Qui mauya nin quale aselye, uan oi laquetuva lye!” Ilye i hyane hildor quenter i imya nat.

	31 Then Jesus said to them: “All among you will fall away from me in this night, for it is written: 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.' 32 But after my being raised, I will go before you into Galilee!” 33 But in answer Peter said to him: “[Even] if all will fall away from you, I will not fall away!” 34 Jesus said to him: “Truly I say to you: In this night, before a cock shall sound, you will deny me thrice!” 35 Peter said to him: “If it is necessary for me to die with you, I shall not ever deny you!” All the other disciples said the same thing.

	36 Tá Yésus túle aselte i nómenna estaina Etsemane, ar quentes hildoryannar: “Hama sisse íre lelyan tar hyamien!” 37 Ar tálala Péter ar i yondo atta Severaio as inse, *yestanes same naire ar náve *tarastaina. 38 Tá quentes téna: “Feanya ná lunga tenna qualme nairenen. Á lemya sisse ar hepa inde coive asinye!” 39 Apa menie şinta vanta ompa, lantanes cendeleryanna, hyámala ar quétala: “Atarinya, qui ta ná cárima, nai yulma sina autuva nillo! Ananta, lá ve inye mere, mal ve tyé mere!”
	40 Ar túles i hildonnar ar hirne te lorne, ar quentes Péterenna: “Ma ualde polde hepe inde coive ter erya lúme asinye? 41 Na coive ar hyama, hya lantuvalde mir úşahtie! An i faire mína ná, mal i hráve milya ná!”

	36 Then Jesus came with them to the place called Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples: “Sit here while I go thither to pray!” 37 And bringing Peter and the two sons of Zebedee with himself, he began to have grief and to be troubled. 38 Then he said to them: “My soul is heavy until death with grief. Remain here and keep yourselves awake with me!” 39 After going a short walk forward, he fell upon his face, praying and saying: “My Father, if that is possible, may this cup pass away from me! And yet, not as I wish, but as you wish!”
	40 And he came to the disciples and found them asleep, and he said to Peter: “Could you not keep yourselves awake for [ter = through] a single hour with me? 41 Be awake and pray, or you will fall into temptation! For the spirit is eager, but the flesh is weak!”

	42 Ata, mi tatya lú, lendes oa ar hyamne, quétala: “Atarinya, qui ua cárima i si autuva ú sucienyo sa, nai indómelya martuva!” 43 Ar túles ata, ar hirneset lorne, an hendultat nánet lunge. 44  Ar lendes oa tello ar hyamne mi neldea lú, quétala i imya quetta ata. 45 Tá túles i hildonnar ar quente téna: “Lau en húmalde ar séralde? Yé, i lúme ná hare yasse i Atanyondo nauva antana olla mannar úcarindoron! 46 Á orta, alve mene! Ela! Ye anta ni olla utúlie hare!”
	47 Ar íre i quettar en enger antoryasse, yé, tasse túle Yúras, quén i yunqueo, ar óse hoa şanga arwa macillion ar rundalion túle ho i hére *airimor ar i amyárar mici i lie.
	48 Ye antane se olla antanelyane tien tanwa, quétala: “Aiquen ye miquin, áse mapa mir mando!” 49 Ar térave lendes Yésunna ar quente: “Hara máriesse, Rappi!”, ar minqueses. 

	42 Again, for [lit. in] a second time, he went away and prayed, saying: “My Father, if it is not possible that this will pass without my drinking it, let your will happen!” 43 And he came again, and found them asleep, for their eyes were heavy. 44 And he went away from them and prayed for a third time, saying the same word again. 45 Then he came to the disciples and said to them: “Surely you are not still sleeping and resting? Behold, the time is near when the Son of Man will be given over into the hands of sinners! 46 Rise, let us go! Look! [He] who betrays me has come near!”
	47 And while the words were still in his mouth, behold, there came Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great crowd having swords and clubs came from the chief priests and the elders among the people.
	48 [He] who gave him over had given them a sign, saying: “Anyone that I kiss, take him into custody!” 49 And straightway he went to Jesus and said: “Greetings, Rabbi!”, and he kissed him.

50 Mal Yésus quente senna: “Málo, mana castalya tulien?” Tá túlelte ompa ar panyaner má Yésusse ar nampe se mir mando. 51 Mal yé, quén mici i náner as Yésus rahtane máryanen ar tunce macilya ar pente i héra *airimo mól ar aucirne hlarya. 52 Tá Yésus quente senna: “Á panya macilelya nómeryanna ata, an illi i mapar i macil nauvar nancarne i macilden. 53 Hya ual intya i lertan arca Atarinyanna, mentaveryan ninna lú sinasse or lehióni yunque valion? 54 Mal tá manen nauvas carna nanwa, i Tehtele ya quete i sie mauyas marta?” 
	55 Lúme yanasse Yésus quente i şangannar: “Ma utúlielde arwe macillion ar rundalion, ve pilunna, ni-mapien? Aure apa aure hamnen i cordasse peantala, ananta ualde nampe ni. 56 Mal ilqua sina amartie carien i Tehtele nanwa!” Tá ilye i hildor hehtaner se ar úşer.

50 But Jesus said to him: “Fellow, what is your reason for coming?” Then they came forward and laid hand on Jesus and took him into custody. 51 But behold, one among [those] that were with Jesus reached out with his hand and drew his sword and struck the chief priest's thrall and cut off his ear. 52 Then Jesus said to him: “Put your sword in its place again, for all that take [to] the sword will be undone by the sword [macil-nen > macilden]. 53 Or do you not suppose that I can make petition to my Father, for him to send me in this moment over twelve legions of angels? 54 But then how will it be made true, the Scripture that says that so it must happen?”
	55 In that time Jesus said to the crowds: “Have you come with swords and clubs, as upon a robber, to seize me? Day after day I sat in the temple teaching, and yet you did not seize me. 56 But all this has happened to make the Scripture [come] true!” Then all the disciples abandoned him and fled.

	57 Tá i namper Yésus tulyane se oa Caiafas i héra *airimonna, íre i parmangolmor ar i amyárar ocomner. 58 Mal Péter hilyane te hairallo, tenna paca i héra *airimóva, ar lendes minna ar hamune as i núror, cenien i metta. 
	59 I hére *airimor ar i Tára Combe cestaner húrala *vettie Yésunna, nahtieltan se, 60 mal hirnelte munta, ómu rimbe húrala astarmoli túler ompa. Mí tyel, atta túlet ompa 61 ar quentet: “Nér sina equétie: 'Polin hate undu i corda Eruva ar carasta sa ama ter auri nelde!'” 62 Tá i héra *airimo oronte ar quente senna: “Ma munta hanquétal? Mana ya queni sine *vettar lyenna?” 63 Mal Yésus náne quilda. Ar i héra *airimo quente senna: “I coirea Erunen panyan lye nu vanda i nyaruval men qui nalye i Hristo, i Eruion!” 64 Yésus quente senna: “Elye equétie sa. Mal quetin lenna: Ho sí cenuvalde i Eruion hára ara i Túreo forma ar túla menelo fanyassen!”

	57 Then [those] who seized Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the chief priest, while the scribes and the elders assembled. 58 But Peter followed them from afar, as far as the courtyard of the chief priest, and he went inside and sat down with the servants, to see the end.
	59 The chief priests and the High Counsil sought lying testimony against Jesus, for them to kill him, 60 but they found nothing, though numerous lying witnesses came forward. In the end, two came forward 61 and said: “This man has said: 'I can throw down the temple of God and build it up in [ter = through] three days.'”  62 Then the chief priest arose and said to him: “Are you answering nothing? What is [it] that these people witness against you?” 63 But Jesus was silent. And the chief priest said to him: “By the living God I put you under oath that you will tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God!” 64 Jesus said to him: “You have said it. But I say to you: From now [on] you will see the Son of God sitting by the right hand of the Power and coming on the clouds of heaven!”

65 Tá i héra *airimo narcane larmaryar, quétala: “Naiequéties! Mana an maure astarmoiva samilve? Yé! Ahlárielde i i naiquetie. 66  Mana sanalde?” Hanquentelte: “Náse valda qualmeo!” 67 Tá piutanelte cendeleryanna ar penter se nondaltainen, 68 quétala: “Queta men ve Erutercáno, a Hristo! Man ná ye pente lye?”
	69 Sí Péter hamne i ettasse i pacasse, ar *núre túle senna, quétala: “Yando elye náne as Yésus Alileallo!” 70 Mal laquentes ta epe illi, quétala: “Uan ista pa mana quétal!” 71 Apa lendes ettenna i andonna, hyana vende túne se ar quente innar enger tasse: “Nér sina náne as Yésus Nasaretello!” 72 Ar ata laquentes ta, vandanen: “Uan ista i nér!” 

65 Then the chief priest tore his garments, saying: “He has blasphemed! What further need for [-va] witnesses do we have? Behold! You have heart the blasphemy. 66 What do you think?” They answered: “He is worthy of death!” 67 Then they spat in his face and struck him with fists, 68 saying: “Speak to us as a prophet, o Christ! Who is [it] that struck you?”
	69 Now Peter sat down on the outside in the court, and a maidservant came to him, saying: “You too were with Jesus from Galilee!” 70 But he denied that before all, saying: “I do not know of what you are speaking!” 71 After he went out to the gate, another maiden noticed him and said [to the ones] that were there: “This man was with Jesus from Nazareth!” 72 And again he denied it, with an oath: “I do not know the man!”

73 Apa şinta lúme i tarner *os se túler ar quenter Péterenna: “É nalye mici te, an questalya apanta lye!” 74 Tá *yestanes húta ar quete vandalínen: “Uan ista i nér!” Ar mí imya lú tocot lamyane. 75 Ar Péter enyalde ya Yésus quente: 'Nó tocot lamyuva, ni-laluval nel!” 76 Ar lendes ettenna ar láve sáre nírin sire.

73 After a short time those that stood around him came and said to Peter: “Indeed you are among them, for your speech reveals you!” 74 Then he started to curse and say with oaths: “I do not know the man!” And in the same moment a cock sounded. 75 And Peter recalled [that] which Jesus said: “Before a cock shall sound, you will deny me thrice!” 76 And he went outside and let bitter tears flow.

RANTA 27
Íre arin túle, ilye i hére *airimor ar i amyárar imíca i lie carner úvie Yésunna nahtien se. 2 Nunteltes ar tulyane se oa ar antane se olla Pílato i *nórecánonna. 
	3 Tá, íre Yúras cenne i hé náne námaina, sámes inwis ar talle nan i telpemittar *nelequean i hére *airimoin ar i amyárain. 4 Quentes: “Úcarnen íre antanen olla faila serce!” Quentelte: “Mana ta elmen? Elye cena sanna!” 5 Tá hantes i telpemittar mir i corda ar oante, ar lendes oa ar lingane inse. 

CHAPTER 27
When morning came, all the chief priests and the elders among the people made a consideration  against Jesus in order to kill him. 2 They bound him and led him away and gave him over to Pilate the governor.
	3 Then, when Judas saw that he was being judged, he had a change of mind and brought back the thirty silver pieces to the chief priests and the elders. 4 He said: “I sinned when I gave over righteous blood!” They said: “What is that to us? You see to it!” 5 Then he threw the silver pieces into the temple and went off, and he went away and hanged himself.

6 Mal i hére *airimor namper i telpemittar ar quenter: “Ua lávina hatitat mir i aire harwe, an nalte *paityale sercen!” Apa carie úvie *homancanelte tainen i cemnaro resta, ve sapsanóme etteleain. 8 Etta tana nóme anaie estaina “Serceresta” tenna aure sina. 9 Tá ya náne quétina ter Yeremia i Erutercáno náne carna nanwa: “Ar nampelte i telpemittar *nelequean, i *paityale i neren ye sáme valdierya tulcana, yen i Israelindi tulcane *paityale, ar antanelte tai i cemnaro restan, ve i Héru canne nin!”
	11 Mal Yésus tarne epe i nórecáno, ar i nórecáno maquente senna: “Ma elye aran Yúraron ná?” Yésus hanquente: “Elye quete sa!” 12 Mal íre i hére *airimor ar i amyárar quenter i carnelyanes ongweli, uas hanquente. 13 Tá Piláto quente senna: “Ma ual hlare ilye i nati yar *vettalte lyenna?” 14 Ananta uas hanquente senna, lá erya quettanen. Etta i nórecáno sáme túra elmenda.

6 But the chief priests took the silver-pieces and said: “It is not allowed to throw them into the holy treasury, for they are a payment for blood!” After making a consideration they bought with them the potter's field, as a grave-place for strangers. 8 Therefore that place has been named “Bloodfield” until this day. 9 Then [that] which was said through Jeremiah the Prophet was made true: “And they took the thirty silver pieces, the payment for the man that had his worth fixed, for whom the Children of Israel fixed a payment, and they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord commanded me!”
	11 But Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him: “Are you king of the Jews?” Jesus answered: “You yourself say it!” 12 But when the chief priests and the elders said that he had done [/committed] crimes, he did not answer. 13 Then Pilate said to him: “Do you not hear all the things that they witness against you?” 14 And yet he did not answer him, not with a single word. Therefore the governor had great wonder.

	15 Aşarello aşarenna náne haime i nórecánova lehtie i şangan quén i mandollo, i nér ye mernelte. 16 Mi yana lúme enge mandoltasse nér estaina Varavas, arwa ulca esseo. 17 Etta, apa ocomnelte, Piláto quente téna: “Man ná i quén ye merilde i lehtuvan len, Varavas hya Yésus estaina Hristo?” 18 An sintes i antaneltes olla *hrúcennen. 19 Ente, íre hamnes i hammasse namiéva, verirya mentane senna, quétala: “Nai nauva munta imbi lyé ar tana faila nér, an sámen túra naice síra oloresse pa sé!” 20 Mal i hére *airimor ar i amyárar *mirquenter i şangar arcienna Varavas, mal i nancarumnelte Yésus. 21 Hanquentasse i nórecáno quente téna: “Man imíca i atta merilde i lehtuvan lenna?” Quentelte: “Varavas!”  

	15 From festival to festival a habit [/custom] of the governor was to release to the crowd a person from the prison, the man that they wanted. 16 At that time [there] was in prison a man called Barabbas, having an evil name [/reputation]. 17 Therefore, after they gathered, Pilate said to them: “Who is the person that you wish I am to release to you, Barabbas or Jesus called Christ?” 18 For he knew that they gave him over because of envy. 19 Furthermore, when he sat on the seat of judgement, his wife sent to him, saying: “May there be nothing between you and that righteous man, for I had great pain today in a dream concerning him!” 20 But the chief priests and the elders talked the crowds into requesting Barabbas, but that they were to destroy Jesus. 21 In answer the governor said to them: “Who among the two do you wish that I am to release to you?” They said: “Barabbas!”

22 Piláto quente téna: “Tá mana caruvan Yésun ye ná estaina Hristo?” Illi mici te quenter: “Nai nauvas tarwestana!” 23 Eques: “Tá mana ulco acáries?” Mal yámelte en ambe: “Nai nauvas tarwestana!” 
	24 Íre cennes i poldes care munta aşea, mal ambe ron amortie ortumne, Piláto nampe nén ar sóve máryat epe i şanga, quétala: “Uan same cáma serceo nér sino! Elde cena sanna!” 25 Ar hanquentasse i lie quente: “Nai sercerya tuluva menna ar hínalmannar!” 26 Tá leryanes tien Varavas, mal Yésus rípes ar antane se olla náven tarwestaina.
	27 Tá i nórecáno ohtari taller Yésus mir i túrion ar comyaner i quanda ohtarhosse senna. 28 Ar nampelte sello lanneryar ar panyaner sesse culda colla, 29 ar carnelte ríe neceliva ar panyaner sa caryasse, ar esce formaryasse.

22 Pilate said to them: “Then what am I to do to Jesus who is called Christ?” All among them said: “Let him be crucified!” 23 He said: “Then what evil has he done?” But they cried still more: “Let him be crucified!”
	24 When he saw that he could do nothing beneficial, but that sooner an uprising was going to arise, Pilate took water and washed his hands before the crowd, saying: “I do not have guilt of the blood of this man! You see to it!” 25 And in answer the people said: “Let his blood come upon us and upon our children!” 26 Then he freed to them Barabbas, but Jesus he flayed and gave him over to being crucified.
	27 Then the governor's soldiers brought Jesus into the palace, and gathered the entire soldier-host to him. 28 And they took from him his clothes and put on him a scarlet [culda, golden-red] cloak, 29 and they made a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand.

Ar lantala occaltanta epe se carampelte senna yaiwenen, quétala: “Aiya, aran Yúraron!” 30 Ar piutanelte senna ar namper i esce ar se-penter caryasse. 31 Ar apa yaiwelta senna nampelte oa sello i colla ar panyaner sesse vére larmaryar, ar tulyaneltes oa náven tarwestana.
	32 Mí malle hirnelte nér ho Ciréne estaina Símon. Nér sina mauyanelte cole tarwerya. 33 Ar íre túlelte nómenna estaina Olyaşa, tá ná, *Caraxo, 34 antanelte sen limpe ostimesse as *sála, mal apa tyavie sa uas merne suce. 35 Apa tarwestie se etsantelte larmaryar hatiénen *şanwali, 36 ar hámala tasse tíraneltes. 37 Ente, or carya panyanelte i ongwequetta senna, técina: “Si ná Yésus, aran Yúraron!”

And falling on their knees before him they spoke to him with scorn, saying: “Hail, king of the Jews!” 30 And they spat on him and took the reed and struck him on his head. 31 And after their scorn against him, they took away from him the cloak and put on him his own clothes, and they led him away to be crucified.
	32 On the road they found a man for Cyrene called Simon. This man they compelled to carry his cross. 33 And when they came to a place called Golgotha, that is, Skull, 34 they gave him wine in a mix with gall, but after tasting it he did not want to drink. 35 After crucifying him they distributed his garments by throwing lots, 36 and sitting there they were watching him. 37 Furthermore, over his head they put the accusation [ongwequetta = “crime-word”] against him, written: “This is Jesus, king of the Jews!”

38 Tá pilu atta nánet tarwestane óse, quén foryaryasse ar quén hyaryaryasse. 39 I lahtaner naiquenter senna, pálala cariltar 40 ar quétala: “Elye ye hatumne i corda undu ar encarastumne sa ter auri nelde, á rehta imle! Qui nalye Eruo Yondo, tula undu i tarwello!” 41 Mí imya lé yú i hére *airimor as i parmangolmor caramper senna yaiwenen ar quenter: 42 “Exeli erehties; inse uas pole rehta! Náse Israélo aran; lava sen sí tule undu i tarwello ar savuvalme sesse! 43 Apánies estelya Erusse; sí lava hén etelehta se qui hé mere se, an quentes: Nanye Eruo Yondo!” 44 Mí imya lé yú i pilur tarwestane óse naityaner se.
	45 I enquea lúmello mornie lantane or i quanda nóre, tenna i nertea lúme. 46 *Os i nertea lúme Yésus yáme taura ómanen, quétala: “Eli, eli, lema savahtáni?”, ta ná: “Ainonya, Ainonya, mana castalya hehtien ni?”

38 Then two robbers were crucified with him, one at his rigth and one at his left. 39 [Those] that passed by blasphemed against him, shaking their heads 40 and saying: “You who were going to throw the temple down and re-build it in [ter = through] three days, save yourself! If you are God's Son, come down from the cross!” 41 In the same manner also the chief priests and the scribes spoke to him with scorn and said: 42 “Others he has saves; himself he cannot save! He is king of Israel; let him now come down from the cross and we will believe in him! 43 He has put his hope in God; now let him [= God] rescue him if he wants him, for he said: I am God's Son!” 44 In the same manner also the robbers crucified with him abused him.
	45 From the sixth hour darkness fell over the entire land, until the ninth hour. 46 Aroud the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a mighty voice, saying: “Eli, eli, lema sabachtani?”, that is: “My God, my God, what is your reason for forsaking me?”

47 Íre hlasselte si, queneli imíca i tarner tasse quenter: “Nér sina yála Elía!” 48 Ar mi imya lú quén mici te nampe hwan ar quante sa sára limpenen ar panyane sa escesse ar láve sen suce. 49 Mal i exi quenter: “Lava sen náve! Alve cene qui Elia tule rehtien se!” 50 Mal Yésus ata yáme taura ómanen ar effirne. 
	51 Ar yé! i fanwa i cordasse náne narcana mir atta, telmello talmanna, ar i cemen palle, ar i ondor náner şance. 52 Ar i noiri náner pantane, ar rimbe hroali i lorne airion náner ortane, 53 ar túlala et i noirillon apa anes ortana túlelte mir i aire osto ar tanner inte rimbain. 54 Mal i *tuxantur ar óse i tíraner Yésus, íre cennelte i *cempalie ar i nati martala, náner ita ruhtaine, quétala: “Nér sina é náne Eruo Yondo!”

47 When they heard this, some among [those] who stood there said: “This man is calling Elijah!” 48 And in the same moment one among them took a sponge and filled it with sour wine and put it on a reed and let him drink. 49 But the others said: “Let him be! Let us see if Elijah comes to save him!” 50 But Jesus again cried with a mighty voice and expired.
	51 And behold! the curtain in the temple was torn into two, from top to bottom, and the earth shook, and the rocks were split. 52 And the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the sleeping holy ones were raised, 52 and coming out of the tombs after he was raised they came into the holy city and showed themselves to many. 54 But the centurion and with him [those] that were watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake and the things happening, were extremely terrified, saying: “This man was indeed God's Son!”

55 Enger tasse rimbe nisseli tírala hairallo, i hilyaner Yésus Alileallo *vevien sen. 56 Mici té náner María Mahtaléne, yú María amil Yácovo ar Yósefo, ar i amil yondoron Severaio. 
	57 Íre şinye lantane, túle tar lára nér Arimaşeallo estaina Yósef, ye yú náne Yésus hildo. 58 Nér sina lende Pilátonna ar arcane Yésuo hroa. Tá Piláto antane i canwa, ar anes antana sen. 59 Ar Yósef nampe i hroa ar sa-vaitanes poica *páşenen, 60 ar sa-panyanes vinya noiriryasse, ya nóvo carnes ve hróta i ondosse. Apa *peltanes sar epe i noirio fennanna oantes. 61 Mal María Mahtaléne ar i hyana María enger en tasse, hámala epe i noire.

55 There were there many women watching from afar, [those] who followed Jesus from Galilee to serve him. 56 Among them were Mary Magdalene, also Mary mother of Jacob and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
	57 When evening fell, [there] came thither a rich man from Arimathea called Josef, who also was a disciple of Jesus. 58 This man went to Pilate and asked for Jesus' body. Then Pilate gave the order, and it was given to him. 59 And Joseph took the body and wrapped it in pure linen, 60 and he put it in a new tomb, which beforehand he made as an artifical cave [hróta] in the rock. After he rolled a stone to before the door of the tomb he went off. 61 But Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were still there, sitting before the tomb.

62 I hilyala auresse, ya náne apa i Manwie, i hére *airimor ar i Farisar ocomner epe Piláto, 63 quétala: “Heru, enayálielme ya tana nér huruiva quente íre en anes coirea: 'Apa auri nelde nauvan enortana.' 64 Etta á anta i canwa, ar i noire nauva varyaina tenna i neldea aure, pustien hildoryar ho tulie ar pilie se ar quetie i lienna: 'Anes ortana qualinallon!', ar i métima loima nauva olca epe i minya!” 65 Piláto quente téna: “Samilde cundor. Mena ar ása care ve varna ve istalde!” 66 Lendelte ar carner i noire varna *lihtiénen i ondo ar paniénen i cundor tasse.

62 On the following day, which was after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered before Pilate, 63 saying: “Lord, we have recalled [that] which this man of lies said when he was still alive: 'After three days I shall be raised again.' 64 Therefore give the order, and the tomb will be protected until the third day, to stop his disciples from coming and stealing him and saying to the people: 'He was raised from the dead!', and the last error will be worse than the first!” 65 Pilate said to them: “You have guards. Go and make it as safe as you know!” 66 They went and made the tomb safe by sealing the stone and by putting the guards there.

RANTA 28 
Apa i *sendare, árasse i minya auresse i otsolo, María Mahtaléne ar i hyana María túler cenien i noire. 2 Ar yé! martane hoa *cempalie, an i Héruo vala túle undu menello ar panyane oa i ondo, ar hamnes sasse. 3 Ilcerya náne ve íta, ar larmaryar náner lossie. 4 Ruciénen sello i cundor paller ar náner ve qualine. 
5 Mal i vala quente i nissennar: “Ávas ruce, an istan i cesteaste Yésus, ye náne tarwestana. 6 Uas sisse, an anaies ortana, ve quentes. Tula, cena i nóme yasse caines! 7 Ar mena lintiénen ar nyara hildoryain in anaies ortana qualinallon, ar yé! ménas epe le mir Alilea; tasse cenuvaldes. Yé, anyárien lent!”
	8 Ar lintiénen autala i noirillo, arwa ruciéno ar túra alasseo, nornette ta-nyarien hildoryain. 9 Ar yé! Yésus velde tu ar quente: “Hara máriesse!” Túlette senna ar nampet talyat ar lantanet undu epe se. 19 Tá Yésus quente túna: “Áva ruce! Mena, nyara hánonyain, menieltan mir Alilea, ar tasse cenuvalte ni!”

CHAPTER 28
After the day of rest, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the tomb. 2 And behold! there occurred a great earthquake, for the angel of the Lord came down from heaven and put away the stone, and he sat on it. 3 His appearance was like lightening [íta = flash], and his garments were snow-white. 4 For the fear of him the guards shook and were like dead. 5 But the angel said to the women: “Do not fear, for I know that you are seeking Jesus, who was crucified. 6 He is not here, for he has been raised, as he said. Come, see the place where he lay! 7 And go with speed and tell his disciples that he has been raised from the dead, and behold! he is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him. Behold, I have told you [dual]!”
	8 And quickly going away from the grave, having fear and great joy, they [dual] ran to tell that to the disciples. 9 And behold! Jesus met them [dual] and said: “Good day!” [lit. “Remain in goodness”, a standard Quenya greeting]. They [dual] came to him and seized his feet and fell down  before him. 19 Then Jesus said to them: “Do not be afraid! Go, tell my brothers, for them to go into Galilee, and there they will see me!”

	11 Mal apa lendette, yé, queneli i cundoron lender mir i osto ar nyarne i héra *airimon pa ilqua ya martanelyane. 12 Ar yomeniesse as i amyárar carnelte úvie, ar antanelte fárea nóte telpemittalíva i ohtarin 13 ar quenter: “Queta: 'Hildoryar túler i lómisse ar pilder se íre anelme lorne.' 14 Ar qui si tule i nórecáno hlarunnar, elme quetuvar senna, ar elde áva ruce!” 15 Ar nampelte i telpemittar ar carner ve náne tien peantana, ar quetie sina anaie vintaina mici Yúrar tenna aure sina. 
	16 Mal i hildor minque lender mir Alilea, i orontenna yasse Yésus quente i velumnes te, 17 ar íre cenneltes, lantanes undu epe se, mal queneli úner tance i saviesse. 18 Ar Yésus lende téna ar carampe téna, quétala: “Ilya hére anaie nin antana mi menel cemenye. 19 Etta á lelya ar cara ilye nóri hildoli, sumbala te mí esse i Ataro ar i Yondo ar i Aire Feo, 20 peantala te care ilye i nati yar inye canne len. Ar yé, inye ea aselde ilye i rí tenna tyel i rando!”

	11 But after they [dual] went, behold, some of the guards went into the city and told the chief prist about everything that had happened. 12 And at a meeting with the elders they made consideration, and they gave a sufficient number of silver-pieces to the soldiers 13 and said: “Say: 'His disciples came in the night and stole him while we were asleep.' 14 And if this comes to the ears of the governor, we shall speak to him, and you do not be afraid!” 15 And they took the silver-pieces and did as they were instructed, and this saying has been spread among [the] Jews until this day.
	16 But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus said that he was going to meet them, 17 and when they saw him, they fell down before him, but some among them were not firm in the faith. 18 And Jesus went to them and spoke to them, saying: “All lordship has been given me in heaven and earth. 19 Therefore go and make all nations disciples, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, 20 teaching them to do all the things that I commanded you. And behold, I am with you all the days until the end of the age!”

