Filemon

Philemon

---

Paulo, mandosse Yésus Hriston, ar Timoşeo hánolma, Fílemon meldalmanna, ye mole aselme, 2 ar Apfia néşalmanna, ar Arhipponna ye ná ohtar aselme, ar i ocombenna ya ea coalyasse: Nai samuvalde oravie ar raine ho Eru Atarelva ar i Heru Yésus Hristo.
	4 Illume hantan Ainonya ire quetin pa lye hyamienyassen, 5 pan hláran pa melmelya ar savielya ya samil Yésus Hristova ar ilye i airiva, 6 antielyan exelin ranta savielyo, i istyanen ilya mánava ya samilve Hristosse. 7 An camnen túra alasse ar tiutie melmelyanen, an i airion lauce felmi nar envinyante elyenen, háno.


Paul, in prison for [the sake of] Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon our beloved, who works with us, 2 and Apphia our sister who is a soldier with us, and to the congregation that is in your house: May you [pl.] have mercy and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
	4 I always thank my God when I speak about you [sg.] in my prayers, 5 since I am hearing about your love and your faith which you have for [-va] Jesus Christ and for all the holy ones, 6 so that you give [lit. for your giving]to others a part in your faith, by the knowledge of every god thing that we have in Christ. 7 And I received joy and comfort by your love, for the warm feelings of the holy ones are renewed by means of you, brother.

	8 Sina castanen, ómu samin túra huore Hristosse antien lyen canwa pa ya ná vanima, 9 merin ambe rato horta lye melmenen, nála ya nanye: Paulo, amyára, sí yando mandosse Hriston. 10 Hortan lye pa hínanya ye ónen naxenyassen: Onésimo, 11 yá ú *yuhtiéno elyen, mal sí nála *yuhtiéno lyen ar nin véla. 12 Sé tyarin nanwene lyenna, ta ná, véra endanya.

	8 For this reason, though I have great courage in Christ to give you a command about what is proper, 9 I sooner wish to urge you by love, being what I am: Paul, an elder, now also in prison for [the sake of] Christ. 10 I urge you about my child which I begat in my chains: Onesimus, 11 formerly without use for you, but now being of use to you and me alike. 12 Him I make return to you, that is, my own heart.

	13 Mernen hepitas asinye, náveryan núro nin nómelyasse, mí naxi yar colin i evandilyonen. 14 Mal ú lavielyo uan mere care *aiqua, ar sie mane cardalya ua nauva maustanen, mal véra léra cilmelyanen. 15 Cé sina castanen anes mapaina lyello şinta lúmen, *nancamielyan se tennoio, 16 lá ambe ve mól mal ve amba la mól, ve melda háno, or ilqua inyen, mal manen ita ambe elyen, i hrávesse ar i Herusse véla. 17 Etta, qui sanal pa ní ve arwa ranto aselye, cama se ve qui camumnel ni. 18 Ente, qui acáries *aiqua raica hya same rohta lyen, nota ta inyenna. 19 Ni Paulo téca véra mányanen: Paityuvan – lá nyarien lyen i rohtalya inyen ná véra quenelya. 20 Ná, háno: nai inye samuva ñetie lyello i Herusse! Alye envinyata lauce felmenyar Hristosse.

	13 I wished to keep him with me, for him to be a servant for me in your place, in the chains that I bear for the gospel. 14 But without your permission I do not want to do anything, and thus your good deed will not be by compulsion, but by your own free choise. 15 Maybe for this reason he was taken from you for a short time, for you to receive him back forever, 16 no more as a slave but as more than a slave, as a beloved brother, above everything to me, but how much more to you, in the flesh and in the Lord alike. 17 Therefore, if you think about me as having a share with you, receive him as if you were going to receive me. 18 Furthermore, if he has done anything wrong or has a debt to you, count that against me. 19 I Paul am writing with my own hand: I will pay – not to tell you that your debt to me is your own person. 20 Yes, brother: may I have gain from you in the Lord. You renew [imperative!] my warm feelings in Christ.

	21 Nála tanca i caruval ve méran técan lyenna, istala i caruval yando amba, han ya quetin. 22 Mal mí imya lú á manwa nin nóme marien, an estelinya ná i hyamieldainen nauvan leryaina len. 
	23 Epafras, ye ea mandosse óni Yésus Hristosse, *suila lye; 24 yando Marco, Aristarco, Lémas, Lúcas – i molir asinye. 
	25 Nai i Heru Yésus Hristo lisse nauva as fairelda!

	21 Being sure that you will do as I want I am writing to you, knowing that you will do more as well, beyond [that] which I write. 22 But at the same time prepare for me a place to dwell, for my hope is that by your [pl.] prayers I shall be released to you.
	23 Epaphras, who is in prison with me in Jesus Christ, greets you [sg.]; 24 also Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke – [the ones] who labour with me.
	25 May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your [pl.] spirit!

