Pétero Minya Tenna

First Letter of Peter

---

RANTA 1
Péter, Yésus Hristo apostel, i etyannar vintaine mi Pontus, Alatia, Capparocia, Ásia ar Viºinia – i cílinnar 3 i náner sinwe nóvo lo Eru i Atar, airitiénen lo i Faire, carieltan ve Eruo indóme ar náveltan poitaine Yésus Hristo sercenen: Nai samuvalde Erulisse ar raine úvesse!

CHAPTER 1
Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ, to the exiles scattered in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia – to the chosen ones 3 that were known beforehand by God the Father, by sanctification by the spirit, by their doing according to God's will and for them to be purified by the blood of Jesus Christ: May you have grace and peace in abundance!

	3 Aistana na Eru, Yésus Hristo Herulvo Atar, an túra óravieryanen ven-antanes vinya *nónie coirea estelenna i *enortiénen Yésus Hristova qualinillon, 4 *aryonienna ya ua vahtaina hya fífírula. Nas sátina menelde len 5 i nar varyaine lo Eruo túre, saviénen, rehtien ya ná manwa náven apantaina i métima lúmesse. 6 Sinen yando sí samilde túra alasse, ómu mi lúme sina, qui ea maure, samilde nyére mi sina hya tana tyastie. 7 Sie tyastaina savielda, mirwa ambela malta ya ná *hastima ómu nas tyastaina nárenen, nauva hírina ve casta laitaleo ar alcaro ar laitiéno i apantiesse Yésus Hristova. 8 Ualde oi cenne se, ananta melildes. Ualde yéta se sí, ananta savilde sesse ar samir alasse alcarinqua han quettar, 9 pan cámalde i met savieldo, i rehtie fealdaivar.

	3 Blessed be God, the Father of Jesus Christ our Lord, for by his great grace he has given us a new birth to a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 4 to an inheritance that is not stained or fading. It is reserved in heaven for you 5 that are protected by God's power, by faith, for a salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last time. 6 By means of this even now you have great joy, though in this time, if there is need, you have grief in this or that testing. 7 Thus your tested faith, far more valuable than gold that is corruptible though it is tested by fire, will be found a cause of praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 8 You did not ever see him, and yet you love him. You do not look at him now, and yet you believe in him and have a joy glorious beyond words, 9 since you are receiving the goal of your faith, the salvation of your souls.

	10 Pa rehtie sina i *Erutercánor cestaner ar cenºer, i quenter apacelli i Erulisseo ya elde camumner. 11 Névelte hanya mana náne i lúme ya i Faire tesse tenge i Hriston, íre *vettanes nóvo pa Hristo ñwalmi ar i alcari yar tulumner apa tai. 12 Náne tien apantaina i lá inten, mal elden, anelte núror i nation yar sí nar *nyardaine len lo i tuluner lenna i evandilyon, Aire Feanen mentaina menello. Nati sine vali merir ceºe!

	10 Concerning this salvation the Prophets sought and inquired, [those] who spoke predictions [apacen-li > apacelli] of the grace that you were going to receive. 11 They tried to understand what is the time that the Spirit in them indicated for the Christ, when it witnessed beforehand about Christ's torments and the glories that were going to come after them. 12 [It] was revealed to them that not to themselves, but to you, they were servants of the things that now are preached to you by [those] that brought to you the gospel, by Holy Spirit sent from heaven. These things angels want to inquire into!

	13 Etta aqua hepa laicelda, hepiénen sámalda manwaina. Sama estel mí Erulisse ya nauva tulúna lenna i apantiesse Yésus Hristova. 14 Ve *canwacimye híni, áva na cátine ve i íri yar yá sámelde, íre pennelde istya. 15 Mal, indómenen i Aireo ye le-yalle, na yando elde airi ilye carieldassen, 16 an ná técina: «Mauya len náve airi, pan inye aire ná.»

	13 Therefore fully keep [or, maintain] your keenness of perception, by keeping your mind prepared. Have hope in the grace which will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 14 Like obedient children, do not be shaped according to the desires that you formerly had, when you lacked knowledge. 15 But, by the will of the Holy One who called you, be also you holy in all your doings, 16 for [it] is written: «It is necessary for you to be holy, since I am holy.»

	17 Ente, qui yálalde i Atarenna ye ua cime man aiquen ná, mal name ve ilqueno mótie ná, á lenga ruciénen íre marilde ve etyali. 18 An istalde i únelde rehtaine *yávelóra lengiello hastime natalínen, telpenen hya maltanen. 19 Úsie, anelte rehtaine mirwa sercenen, ve ta euleo ú vaxeo hya mordo – Hristo serce. 20 É anes sinwa nóvo nó i tulcie i mardeva, mal anes apantaina i mettasse lúmion márieldan, 21 lé i sénen savir Erusse, ye ortane se qualinillon ar antane sen alcar, panieldan savielda ar estelelda Erusse. 
 
	17 Furthermore, if you are calling to the Father who does not heed who anyone is, but judges as everyone's work is, behave with fear while you dwell as exiles. 18 For you know that you were not saved from fruitless behavior by means of corruptible things, by means of silver or by means of gold. 19 On the contrary, you were saved with precious blood, like that of a lamb without stain or spot – Christ's blood. 20 Indeed he was known beforehand before the founding of the world, but he was revealed at the end of times for your good, 21 you that by him believe in God, who raised him from [the] dead and gave him glory, for you to put your faith and your hope in God.

	22 Apa poitie fealdar cimiénen i nanwie, ya anta hánonilme ú *etyanetiéno, mela quén i exe tumnave i endallo. 23 An vinya *nónie ná len antaina, lá *hastima mal *alahastima erdenen, coirea ar vórea Eruo quettanen. 24 An «ilya hráve ná ve salque, ar ilya alcarerya ná ve salqueo lóte; i salque hesta, ar i lóte lanta oa, 25 mal i Héruo quetie lemya tennoio.» Ar si ná i quetie, i evandilyon *nyardaina len.

	22 After cleansing your souls by heeding the truth, which gives brotherly love without hypocrisy, love one another profoundly from the heart. 23 For a new birth is given to you, not by corruptible but by incorruptible seed, by the word of the living and lasting God. 24 For «all flesh is like grass, and all its glory is like the flower of the grass; the grass withers, and the flower falls away, 25 but the Lord's saying remains forever.» And this is the saying, the gospel preached to you.

RANTA 2
Etta á panya oa ilya ulco ar ilya *ñaunie ar ilye *hrúceni ar ilye narace hanquentar. 2 Ve *vinyanóne lapsar á milya i alahasta ilin i quettava, alieldan mir rehtie, 3 qui atyávielde i Heruo márie.
	4 Íre tulilde senna, i ondonna ya náne quérina oa lo atani, mal ná cílina ar mirwa Erun, 5 yando elde nar carastaine ama ve coirie ondoli, cárala ataque faireva, ve aire *airimosse, *yacien *yancar faireva yar Eru mere came, ter Yésus Hristo. 6 An ve i Tehtele quete: «Yé, panyan Sionde 
cílina ondo, tulcala *vincondo, mirwa, ar aiquen ye save sasse laume nauva naityana.»

CHAPTER 2
Therefore put away all evil and all falsehood and all envies and all harsh answers. 2 As newborn babies long for the uncorrupt milk of the word, for you to grow into salvation, 3 if you have tasted the Lord's goodness. 
	4 When you come to him, to the rock that was turned away by men, but is chosen and precious to God, 5 you as well are built up as living stones, making a building of spirit, as a holy priesthood, to sacrifice sacrifices of spirit that God wants to receive, through Jesus Christ. 6 For as the Scripture says: «Behold, I put in Sion a chosen stone, a founding corner-stone, precious, and anyone who believes in it shall by no means be shamed.»

	7 Etta náse mirwa len i savir; mal in uar save, «i imya ondo ya i ºamnor querner oa ná sí cas i vinco», 8 ar «sar taltiéva ar ondo tyárala queni lanta». Lantalte pan ualte cime i quetta; sie anaielte martyaine. 9 Mal elde nar cílina nosse, arna *airimosse, aire nóre, mirwa lie, náveldan tercánoli i máriéno yeo le-yalle et morniello mir calarya elmendava. 10 An enge lúme ya únelde lie, mal sí nalde Eruo lie; anelde i uar camne óravie, mal nalde sí i é acámier óravie. 
	
	7 Therefore he is precious to you who believe, but to those who do not believe, «the same stone that the builders turned away is now head of the corner», 8 and «a stone of slipping [/stumbling] and a stone causing people to fall». They fall because they do not heed the word; so they have been destined. 9 But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a precious people, for you to be heralds of the goodness of [him] who called you out of darkness into his light of wonder. 10 For there was a time that you were not a people, but now you are God's people; you were the ones that did not receive mercy, but now you are [those] who have indeed received mercy.

	11 Meldar, hortan le ve etyali ar quelli i marir ettelie nóressen: Hepa inde i hráveo mailellon, yar ohtacarir i feanna. 12 Á lenga mai imíca i nóri! Tá i sí quetir ulco pa le, ve pa ulcarindor, nauvar astarmor máre cardaldaron, ar antuvar alcar Erun i auresse ya ceºis te. 13 I Heruo márien á panya inde nu ilya ontie atanion – cé nu i aran, ve inga quén, 14 cé nu cánor mentaine sello pamietien i carir ulco, mal laitien i carir márie.  15 An si ná Eruo indóme: Cariénen márie á pusta i *úhandea carpie quenion i penir istya! 16 Na ve lére queni, mal á *yuhta lérielda, lá nurtien ulco, mal ve Eruo móli. 17 Á anta alcar illin, mela i otornasse, ruca Erullo, á anta alcar i aranen!

	11 Beloved ones, I urge you as exiles and people that dwell in foreign lands: Keep yourselves [away] from the lusts of the flesh, that make war against the soul. Behave well among the nations! 12 Then [those] who now speak evil of you, as of evildoers, will be witnesses of your good deeds, and will give glory to God on the day that he examines them. 13 For the good [/the sake] of the Lord put yourselves under [= subject yourselves to] every creation of men – perhaps under the king, as a superior person, 14 perhaps under governors sent from him to punish [those] who do evil, but to praise [those] who do good. 15 For this is God's will: By doing good stop the witless talk of people that lack knowledge! 16 Be like free people, but use your freedom, not to hide evil, but as God's slaves. 17 Give glory to all, love the brotherhood, fear God, give glory to the king!

	18 Nai núror panyuvar inte nu herultar ilya caurenen, lá nu i mani ar i moicar erinque, mal yando nu i hrangar. 19 An ná vanima nat qui quén, tuntala mana rohtarya Erun, perpere nyéri ar same urdie úfailave. 20 An qui, apa úcarie, nalye palpaina ar perperilyes, manen ta ná *laitima? Mal qui samil urdie íre caril márie, ar perperilyes, ta ná vanima nat Erun. 

	18 Let servants put themselves under [= subject themselves to] their lords with all fear, not under the good ones and the gentle ones alone, but also under the difficult ones. 19 For it is a beautiful thing if a person, perceiving what is his debt [/duty] to God, endures griefs and has difficulty unjustly. 20 For if, after sinning, you are beaten and you endure it, how is that praiseworthy? But if you have difficulty when you do good, and you endure it, that is a beautiful thing to God.

	21 Nat sinanna é anelde yáline, an yando Hristo perpére ñwalmeli elden, hilieldan ca se tieryasse. 22 Uas carne úcare, ar huru úne hírina antoryasse. 23 Íre exeli caramper senna yaiwenen, uas carampe yaiwenen téna. Íre anes ñwalyaina, uas *ordane, mal panyane nattorya epe ye name failave. 24 Sé colle úcarelvar véra hroaryasse i tarwesse, levielvan han úcari ar samielvan coire failiénen. Ar «nahteryainen anelde nestaine». 25 An anelde ve mámar, ranyala; mal sí enutúlielve i mavarenna ye ortire fealvar.

	21 To this thing you were indeed called, for also Christ endured torments for you, for you to follow behind him in his path. 22 He did not do [or, commit] sin, and lie was not found in his mouth. 23 When others spoke to him with scorn, he did not speak with scorn to them. When he was tormented, he did not threaten, but put his case before [the One] who judges justly. 24 He [it was who] bore our sins in his own body on the cross, for us to move beyond sins and for us to have life by righteousness. For «by his wounds you were healed». 25 For you were like sheep, straying; but now we have returned to [the one] who oversees our souls.

RANTA 3
Mi imya lé, nai i nissi i evérier panyuvar inte nu verulta. Sie, qui aiqueni uar cime i quetta, cé nauvalte ñétine ú quetto, veriltaron lengiénen, 2 apa tirie poica lengielda ar i áya ya tanalde. 3 Ar áva netya inde i ettesse, *partiénen findeléva, hya paniénen neteli maltava indesse, hya coliénen larmar, 4 mal á netya inde i endo nulda quennen, i quilda ar moica feo *alahastima larmanen, ya ná ammirwa Eruo hendusse.

CHAPTER 3
In the same manner, let the women that have married subject themselves to [lit. put themselves under] their husband. Thus, if any people do not heed the word, maybe they will be gained without a word, by the conduct of their wives, 2 after watching your pure conduct and the awe [/respect] that you show. 3 And do not adorn yourselves on the outside, by arrangements of hair, or by putting trinkets of gold on yourselves, or by carrying raiments, 4 but adorn yourselves with [-nen] the hidden person [quen-] of the heart, with the incorruptible raiment of the the quiet and gentle soul, which is most precious in God's eyes.

	5 An sie yando i airi nissi i sámer estel Erusse netyaner inte, panyala inte nu verultar, 6 ve Sara carne ya Avraham quente, estala se heru. Ar elde anaier cárine Saro híni, qui carilde márie ar uar caurie pa *aiqua rúcima. 
	7 A veruvi, mara as verildar handenen, antala tien alcar ve ambe milya venen, i inya, pan nalde yando aryoni aselte i Erulisseo coiviéva – hya hyamieldar nauvar hampe. 

	5 For so also the holy women that had hope in God adorned themselves, subjecting themselves to [lit. placing themselves under] their husbands, 6 like Sarah did what Abraham said, calling him lord. And you have been made Sarah's children, if you do good and are not timid about anything fearful.
	7 You husbands, dwell with your wives with understanding, giving them glory as to a weaker vessel, the feminine, since you are also heirs with them to [-o] the grace of life – or your prayers will be hindered.
	
	8 Teldave, á na erya sámo ar sama *ofelme, arwe melmeo hánoldaiva ar lauca endo, nucúmala inde. 9 Áva *nampaitya ulcunen ulcun hya narace quettainen narace quettain; úsie, alde aista, an nat sinanna anaielde yáline, náveldan aistiéno aryoni.
	10 An «ye mere mele coivie ar cene máre aureli, nai hepuvas lambarya ulcullo ar péryat quetiello huru, 11 mal lava sen quere inse ulcullo ar care márie; nai cestuvas raine ar roituva sa! 12 An i Héruo hendu nát quérine failannar, ar hlaryat arcandeltanna, mal i Héru apánie cendelerya ana i carir ulqui.»

	8 Finally, be of a single mind and have sympathy, having love for [-iva] your brothers and a warm heart, humbling yourselves. 9 Do not pay back with evil for evil or with harsh words for harsh words; on the contrary, you are to bless, for to this thing you have been called, for you to be heirs of a blessing. 
	10 For «who wants to love life and see good days, may he keep his tongue from evil and his lips from speaking a lie, 11 but let him turn himself from evil and do good; may be seek peace and pursue it! 12 For the eyes of the Lord are [nát, dual] turned against [the] just ones, and his ears to their petitions, but the Lord has set his face against [those] who do evil things [ulqui = evils].» 

	13 Ar man ná i quén ye caruva ulco len qui uryalde yan mára ná? 14 Ono qui é samuvalde urdie carieldanen márie, valime nalde! Ávalde ruce tello, ar áva na ruhtaine, 15 mal alde airita i Hristo ve Heru endaldasse! Illume sama hanquentalda manwa ilquenen ye cane casta i estelen ya mare lesse, ono cara sie mi milya lé ar arwe áyo.
	16 Hepa *immotuntielda mára! Sie, íre camilde cotye quettali, i queni i quetir ulco pa mára lengielda Hristosse nauvar naityaine. 17 An samie urdie pan cáralde márie, qui Eruo indóme mere sa, ná len arya epe samie urdie pan cáralde ulco.

	13 For who is the person who will do evil to you if you burn [= are eager] for [that] which is good? 14 But if you will indeed have difficulty because of doing good, happy you are! Do not fear from them, and do not be terrified, 15 but you sanctify the Christ as Lord in your heart. Always have your answer ready for everyone who demands a reason for the hope that dwells in you, but do so in a mild manner and having awe [= showing respect]. 
	16 Keep your conscience clean! [lit. keep your self-perception good]. Thus, when you receive hostile words, the people that speak evil about your good behavior in Christ will be shamed. 17 For having difficulty since you are doing good, if God's will wishes it, is to you better [epe =] than having difficulty since you are doing evil. 

	18 Yando Hristo qualle erya lú pa úcari, faila quén rá úfailain, ecien sen le-tulya Erunna, apa cennes qualme i hrávesse, mal náne carna coirea i fairenen. 19 Sie yando oantes ar *nyardane i fairennar mandosse, 20 i uar cimne canwaltar íre Eru cóleryasse *lartane Nóho auressen, i carastiesse i marciryava, yasse mancali, tá ná, queni tolto, náner cóline mi varnasse ter i nén.
	21 Ya hanquete ana si, *tumyale, sí rehta lé. Uas panya oa i hráveo soa, mal nas arcande Erunna pa mára *immotuntie, i *enortiénen Yésus Hristova. 22 Háras ara Eruo forma, an oantes menelenna, ar vali ar héri ar túri anainer panyaine nu se.

	18 Christ as well died a single time concerning sins, a righteous person on behalf of unrighteous ones, for it to be possible for him to bring you to God, after he saw death in the flesh, but was made alive by the spirit. 19 Thus he also went away and preached to the spirits in custody, 20 that did not heed their orders when God in his patience waited in the days of Noah, in [= during] the building of the ark, in which some few, that is, eight persons, were carried in safety through the water. 
	21 What answers [/corresponds] to this, baptism, now saves you. It does not put away the filth of the flesh, but it is a petition to God about a good conscience [immotuntie, self-perception], by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 22 He is sitting by God's right hand, for he went away to heaven, and angels and authorities and powers have been put under him [= subjected to him].

RANTA 4
Etta, pan i Hristo náne nwalyaina i hrávesse, mapa ve carmalda i imya nostale sámo – an ye asámie nyére i hrávesse ná han úcari. Sie polis *yuhta i lúme ya lemya coivieryo i hrávesse, lá ambe atanion írin, mal Eruo indómen. 3 An asámielde fárea lúme i vanwiesse arwe taite coiviéno ya queni i nórion *cilir, vantala lehta lengiesse, mailesse, súcala limpe úvesse, arwe hravani merendion, *accasúcala, ar *tyérala cordoni. 4 Sí nalte quátine elmendanen, pan ualde ambe nore aselte celume sinasse vára lengiéva, ar carpalte lenna yaiwenen. 5 Mal queni sine hanquetuvar pa si yen ná manwa namien coirear ar qualini. 6 Etta i evandilyon náne tulúna yando qualinnar, náveltan námine i hrávesse, mi Atanion lé, mal samieltan coivie i fairesse, mi Eruo lé. 


CHAPTER 4
Therefore, since the Christ was tormented in the flesh, take as your weapon the same kind of mind – for [the one] who has had grief in the flesh is beyond sins. Thus he can use the time that remains of his life in the flesh, no more for the wishes of men, but for God's will. 3 For you have had sufficient time in the past having such a life that people of the nations choose, walking in loose behavior, in lust, drinking wine in abundance, having wild parties, overdrinking, and worshiping idols. 4 Now they are filled with wonder, since you do no more run with them in this stream of filthy behavior, and they talk to you with scorn. 5 But these people will answer concerning this to [the one] that is ready to judge the living and the dead. 6 Therefore the gospel was brought also to dead ones, for them to be judged in the flesh, in the manner of Men, but for them to have life in the spirit, in the manner of God.

	7 Mal ilye nation metta utúlie hare. Etta na málesse sámo ar hepa laicelda, hyamien. 8 Or ilye nati, mela quén i exe tumna melmenen, pan melme tupe liyúme úcariva. 9 Cama exeli mir coaldar, lá nurrula. 10 Pan ilquen mici le acámie anna, ása *yuhta íre *veuyalde quén i exe, mí *alavéle Erulissi.
	11 Qui aiquen quete, nai quetuvas ve qui quetieryar náner Eruo quettar. Qui aiquen *veuya, nai *veuyuvas ve i poldorénen ya Eru anta; sie Eru camuva alcar ilye natissen, Yésus Hristonen, ye same i alcar ar i melehte tennoio ar oi. Násie!

	7 But the end of all things has come near. Therefore be in health of mind and keep your keenness of perception, in order to pray. 8 Above all things, love one another with a profound love, since love covers a host of sins. 9 Receive others into your houses, not grumbling. 10 Since everyone among you has received a gift, use it while you serve one another, in various graces.
	11 If anyone speaks, may he speak as if his sayings were God's words. If anyone serves, may he serve as if by the strenght that God gives; thus Gud will receive glory in all things, by Jesus Christ, who has the glroy and the might forever and ever. Amen!

	12 Meldar, áva na elmendasse pa i ruive ya marta mici le tyastien le, ve qui ettelea nat amartie len. 13 Úsie, sama alasse pan samilde ranta i Hristo ñwalmessen, náveldan valime han lesta yando i apantiesse alcareryava. 14 Qui camilde yaiwe Hristo essenen, valime nalde, pan i faire alcaro, é i faire Eruo, caita lenna!

	12 Beloved ones, do not be in wonder about the fire that happens among you to test you, as if a strange thing has happened to you. 13 On the contrary, have joy since you have a part in the torments of the Christ, for you to be happy beyond measure also at the revelation of his glory. 14 If you receive scorn because of Christ's name, happy you are, since the spirit of glory, indeed the spirit of God, lies upon you!

	15 Mal nai *úquen mici le samuva urdie pan acáries nahtie hya pilwe hya ulco hya *atarastie exeli pa vére nattoltar. 16 Ono qui samis urdie pan náse Hristondur, nai uas nauva naityana, mal nai laituvas Eru pa esse sina! 17 An utúlie i lúme yasse i namie nauva *yestaina coallo Eruva. Qui nas *yestaina vello, mana nauva i tyel ion uar *canwacimye Eruo evandilyonen? 18 «Ar qui i faila nér ná rehtaina urdave, mana martuva i Erucotyan ar i úcarindon?» 19 Sie, nai i samir urdie pan cimilte Eruo indóme panyuvar fealtar máryasse, íre carilte márie.

	15 But may no one among you have difficulty because he has done murder or theft or evil or has troubled others concerning their own affairs. 16 But if he has difficulty since he is a Christian, may he not be shamed, but may he praise God about this name! 17 For the time has come when [lit. in which] the judgement will be begun from God's house. If it is begun from us, what will be the end of those who are not obedient to the gospel of God? 18 «For if the righteous man is saved with difficulty, what will happen to the one hostile to God and to the sinner?» 19 Thus, may those who have difficulty since they heed God's will, put their souls in his hand while they do good.

RANTA 5
Etta, i amyárain mici le antan hortale sina – an yando inye ná amyára nér aselde, ar astaro i ñwalmion i Hristo, quén ye same ranta i alcaresse ya nauva apantaina: 2 Na mavari i lámáreo Eruo nu ortírielda, lá maustanen, mal nirmenen, lá camien úfaila *ñéte, mal úruva ºúlenen, 3 lá ve qui turilde i queni nu ortírielda, mal návenen *epemmali i lámáren. 4 Ar íre i Héra Mavar nauva apantaina, camuvalde i alcarinqua ríe ya ua fifírula.

CHAPTER 5
Therefore, to the elders among you I give this urging – for I as well am an older man together with you, and a witness to [lit. of] the torments of the Christ, a person who has a share in the glory that will be revealed: 2 Be shepherds of the flock of God under your patronage, not [as if] by compulsion, but by [free] will, not in order to receive unjust gain, but with a burning spirit, 3 not as if you rule the people under your patronage, but by being examples to the flock. 4 And when the Chief Shepherd shall be revealed, you will receive the glorious crown which is not fading.

	5 Mí imya lé, a nessar, á panya inde nu i amyárar. Mal á cole ve quilta, illi mici le, naldie sámo, quén i exenna, an Eru tare i turquimannar, mal quenin i nucumixer antas lisse.
	6 Etta nucuma inde nu Eruo taura má, carieryan le arte íre i lúme tule. 7 Hata ilya caurelda senna, an nalde valde sen. 8 Hepa laicelda, na cuive! Ñottolda, i Arauco, vanta sir yo tar cestala quelli i polis ammate. 9 Mal tara senna, tulce i saviesse, istala i perpere otornasselda i imye urdier i quanda mardesse. 10 Mal, íre asámielde urdie ter ºinta lúme, i Aino ilya Erulisseva, ye le-yalle oialea alcareryanna Hristonen, immo envinyatuva le. Le-caruvas tulce, le-caruvas polde. 11 Na sen i melehte tennoio, násie!

	5 In the same manner, you young ones, subject yourselves to [lit. put yourselves under] the elders. But carry as your belt, all among you, lowliness of mind, one towards the other, for God stands against the haughty ones, but to people that humble themselves he gives grace.
	6 Therefore humble yourselves under God's mighty hand, for him to make you exalted when the time comes. 7 Throw your every fear at him, for you are important to him. 8 Your enemy, the Devil, walks to and from [sir yo tar = hither and thither] seeking people that he can devour. 9 But stand against him, firm in the faith, knowing that your brotherhood endures the same difficulties in the whole world. 10 But, when you have had difficulty for [ter = through] a short time, the God of all grace, who called you to his everlasting glory by Christ, will himself renew [or, restore] you. He will make you firm, he will make you strong. 11 To him be the might forever, amen!

	12 Ter Silváno, ye notin ve voronda háno, etécien mance quettalissen, hortala ar *vettala i si ná i nanwa lisse Eruo; tara tulce sasse. 13 Ye ea Vavelde, cílina aselde, *suila le, ar sie care Marco yondonya. 14 Á *suila quén i exe miquenen melmeva! Nai illi mici le samuvar raine Hristosse!

	12 Through Silvanus, whom I count as a faithful brother, I have written in few words, urging and witnessing that this is the true grace of God; stand firm in it. 13 [The one] who is in Babel [Babylon], chosen with yourselves, greets you, and so does Mark my son. 14 Greet one another with a kiss of love! May all among you have peace in Christ! 

