I Minya Tecetta Şessaloniceannar 

The First Letter to the Thessalonians

Revision of December 17, 2018

---

RANTA 1 
Paulo ar Silváno ar Timoşeo i ocombenna Şessalonicasse, mi Eru i Atar ar i Heru Yésus Hristo: Nai samuvalde lisse yo raine!
	2 Antalme illume hantale Erun íre enyalilme le hyamielmassen, oi 3 enyalila voronda molielda ar melila mótielda ar voronwielda mí estel ya samilde mi Herulva, Yésus Hristo, epe Ainolva ar Atarelva.  

CHAPTER 1
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy to the congregation in Thessalonica, in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: May you have grace and peace! 
	2 We always give thanks to God when we recall you in our prayers, ever 3 recalling your faithful work and your loving toil and your steadfastness in the hope that you have in our Lord, Jesus Christ, before our God and Father.

4 An istalme, hánor méline lo Eru, manen nalde cíline, 5 an mici elde i evandilyon ya tallelme úne rie quettainen, mal túles túrenen ar Aire Feanen ar carne le aqua tulce pa sa, ve istalde manen lenganelme mici le márieldan. 6 Ar hilyanelde tielmasse ar i Heruo tiesse, camila i quetta mi naraca şangie, arwe alasseo Aire Feanen. 7 Sie anelde cárine *epemma illin i savir Maceroniasse ar Acaiasse. 8 An lello i Heruo quetta anaie carna sinwa, lá rie Maceroniasse ar Acaiasse, mal ilya nómenna savielda Erusse eteménie, ar sie ualme same maure quetiéva erya nat. 9 An té inte nyárar manen minyave túlelme lenna, ar manen quernelde inde Erunna ho i cordoni, náven núror coirea ar nanwa Ainon, 10 ar yétien ompa i tulienna menello Yondoryo, ye ortanes qualinallon: Yésus, ye vi-etelehta i tuluvaila rúşello.

	4 For we know, brothers loved by God, how you are chosen, 5 and among you the gospel that we brought was not only by words, but it came with power and Holy Spirit and made you fully certain about it, as you know how we behaved among you for your good. 6 For you followed in our path and in the Lord's path, receiving the word in harsh tribulation, having joy by Holy Spirit. 7 Thus you were made an example for all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. 8 For from you the Lord's word has been made known, not in Macedonia and Achaia alone, but to every place your faith in God has gone out, and so we not not have need of saying a single thing. 9 For they themselves are telling how we first came to you, and how you turned yourselves to God from the idols, to be servants for a living and true God,  10 and to look forward to the coming from heaven of his Son, whom he raised from [the] dead: Jesus, who delivers us from the coming wrath.

RANTA 2 
An elde istar, hánor, manen tulielma lenna úne muntan. 2 Mal apa perperie orme Filippisse, ve istalde, camnelme verie Erullo quetien lenna Eruo evandilyon, ómu urda mahtiénen. 3 An i hortale ya antalme ua tule loimallo hya úpoiciello hya hurunen, 4 mal tambe anaielme tyastane lo Eru ar hírine valde camien i evandilyon mir hepielma, síve quetilme, lá fastien atani, mal Eru ye tyasta endalma.
	5 An ve istalde, ualme oi equétie passe quettainen, hya nurtana milca írenen: Eru astarindo ná! 6 Ente, ualme ecestie alcar atanillon, lá eldello hya exellon, 7 ómu éciévane men náve lunga cólo ve Hristo aposteli.

CHAPTER 2
For you know, brothers, how our coming to you was not for nothing. 2 But after suffering violence in Philippi, as you know, we received boldness from God to speak to you God's gospel, although by a difficult fight. 3 For the encouragement which we give does not come from errror or from uncleanness or by a lie, 4 but as we have been tested by God and found worthy to receive the gospel into our keeping, so we speak, not to please men, but God who tests our heart.
	5 For as you know, we have not ever spoken with smooth words, or with a hidden greedy desire; God is witness! 6 Furthemore, we have not sought glory from men, not from you or from others, 7 though it would have been possible for us to be a heavy burden as Christ's apostles.

Úsie, anelme moice imíca le, ve íre *tyetila amil lenga mélave vére hínaryain. 8 Etta, pan nalde melde men, sannelme mai pa antave len ranta, lá rie mi Eruo evandilyon, mal yú mi véra fealma, pan olólielde melde men.
	9 An enyalilde, hánor, molielma ar mótielma. Molila lómisse yo auresse, lá náven cólo aiquenna mici le, carnelme sinwa len Eruo evandilyon. 10 Nalde astarmor, ve Eru ná, manen airi ar faile ar ilvane anelme mici elde i savir. 11 Sie istalde mai manen hortanelme ilquen mici le, ve atar hortala hínaryar, 12 tiutala le ar *vettala len, vantieldan valdave Erun ye le-yale mir véra aranierya ar alcarerya.

On the contrary, we were gentle among you, as when a nursing mother behaves lovingly towards her own children. 8 Therefore, since you are dear to us, we thought well about giving you a part, not in God's gospel alone, but also in our own soul, since you have become dear to us.
	9 For you recall, brothers, our work and our toil. Working night and day, not to be a burden upon anyone among you, we made known to you God's gospel. 10 You are witnesses, like God is, how holy and just and perfect we were among you who believe. 11 Thus you know well how we encouraged everyone among you, like a father encouraging his children, 12 comforting you and witnessing to you, for you to walk worthily for God who calls you into his own kingdom and his glory.

	13 Ar tanen yú elme antar Erun hantale voro, an íre ñentelde Eruo quetta ya hlasselde mello, camneldes lá ve atanion quetta, mal ve ta ya nanwave nas: ve Eruo quetta, ya yú mole lesse i savir. 14 An ihílielde, hánor, i tiesse i ocombion Eruo yar ear Yúreasse mi Hristo Yésus, an yú elde eperpérier quenillon véra nóreldo i imye nati yar yú té perperir i Yúrallon, 15 i nacanter i Heru Yésus ar i Erutercánor véla, ar roitaner mé. Ente, loitalte fasta Erun, mal tarilte i márienna ilye atanion, 16 pan pustalte me carpiello queninnar i nórion rehtieltan, ar sie illume quatilte úcareltaron lesta. Mal i mettasse i rúşe utúlie téna. 

	13 And therefore we also give God thanks continually, for when you got God's word which you heard from us, you received it not like men's word, but like that which truly it is: as God's word, which also works [= is active] in you that believe. 14 For you have followed, brothers, in the path of the congregations of God which are in Judea in Jesus Christ, for you as well have suffered from people of your own nation the same things that also they suffer from the Jews, 15 that killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets alike, and persecuted us. Furthermore, they fail to please God, but they stand against the good of all men, 16 since they stop us from speaking to people of the nations for their salvation, and so they always fill the measure of their sins. But in the end the wrath has come upon them.

	17 Ono elme, hánor, íre anelde oa mello şinta lúmesse – mi quén, lá mi enda – névelme en ambe túra veassenen cene cendelelda, túra írenen. 18 Sina castanen mernelme tule lenna – é inye, Paulo – mi lú er ar atta véla, mal Sátan pustane me. 19 An mana estelelma hya alasselma hya i ríe yanen laitalmexer? Ma ta ua elde, epe Herulva, Yésus, mi entulesserya? 20 An elde nar alcarelma ar alasselma!

	17 But we, brothers, when you were away from us for a short time – in person, not in heart – we tried with still greater vigour to see your face, by a great desire. 18 For this reason we wanted to come to you – indeed I, Paul – at one time and two alike, but Satan stopped us. 19 And what is our hope or our joy or the crown by which we praise ourselves? Is that not you, before our Lord, Jesus, at his return? 20 For you are our glory and our joy!

RANTA 3 
Etta, íre ua ence men cole sa ambe, carnelme i cilme náveva hehtana mi Aşen, erinque. 2 Ar mentanelme Timoşeo, ye hánolma ná ar ye aselme Eruo núro ná mi Hristo evandilyon, carieryan le tulce ar hortaven le pa savielda, 3 pustien aiquen návello túcina oa lo şangier sine. An elde istar i nat sina ná ven martyana. 4 É yú íre anelme aselde nyarnelme len nóvo i perperumnelve şangie, ve yú amartie ar istalde. 5 É sina castanen, íre inyen ua ence cole sa ambe, mentanen istien voronwielda. Caurenya náne i cé i *Şahtando le-aşahtie mi sina hya sana lé, ar mótielma náne muntan.

CHAPTER 3
Therefore, when it was not possible for us to bear it [any]more, we made the choice of being left in Athens, alone. 2 For we sent Timothy, who is our brother and who with us is God's servant in the gospel of Christ, for him to make you firm and to urge you concerning your faith, 3 to stop anyone from being pulled away by these tribulations. For you know that this thing is destined for us [incl.]. 4 Indeed also when we [excl.] were with you we told you beforehand that we [incl.] were going to suffer tribulation, as has also happened and you know. 5 Indeed for this reason, when for me it was not possible to bear it [any]more, I sent to know your faithfulness. My fear was that perhaps the Tempter has tempted you in this or that manner, and our toil was for nothing.

	6 Mal sí Timoşeo utúlie menna lello, ar ánies men i máre sinyar pa voronwelda ar melmelda, ar pa manen samilde mára enyalie elmeva, illume milyala cene me, ve elme milyar lé. 7 Etta, hánor, anaielme tiutana pa le voronweldanen, mi ilya maurelma ar şangielma. 8 An sí nalme coirie, qui tarilde tulce i Herusse. 9 An mana hantale ece men anta Erun pa elde, pa i quanda alasse yanen nalme valime rá elden epe Ainolva, 10 íre lómisse yo auresse, i antúra veassenen, cáralme arcandeli cenien cendelelda ar quatien yar savielda pene?

	6 But now Timothy has come to us from you, and he has given us the god news about your faithfulness and your love, and about how you have a good memory of ourselves, always longing to see us, like we long for you. 7 Therefore, brothers, we have been comforted concerning you by your faithfulness, in all our need and our tribulation. 8 For now we are alive, if you stand firm in the Lord. 9 For what thanks is it possible for us to give to God about you, about the whole joy by which we are happy on your behalf before our God, 10 when at night and at day, with the greatest vigour, we are making petitions to see your face and to fill [the things] which your faith lack? 

	11 Sí nai Ainolya ar Atarelva inse antauva men téra tie lenna! 12 Ente, nai i Heru tyaruva le ale ar same úvea melme quén i exeva ar illiva, ve yú elme samir melme eldeva, 13 carien endalda tulca, pen motto airesse epe Ainolva ar Atarelva mí entulesse Herulvo, Yésus, as ilye airiryar. Násie!

	11 Now may our God and our Father himself grant us a straight path to you! 12 Furthermore, may the Lord cause you to grow and have abundant love one for [or 'of', -va] the other and for all, as also we have love for you, 13 to make your heart firm, without spot in holiness before our God and our Father at the return of our Lord, Jesus, with all his holy ones. Amen!

RANTA 4 
Teldave, hánor, arcalme lello ar hortar le i Heru Yésunen: Tambe camnelde mello i istya pa manen mauya len lenga ar fasta Eru, síve é lengalde, mal cara sa ambe aqua. 2 An istalde i hortaler yar antanelme len ter i Heru Yésus. 3 An sie Eruo indóme ná: I nauvalde airinte – i hepuvalde inde oa *hrupuhtiello. 4 Sie mauya ilquenen mici le harya véra venerya, mi airitáve ar mi alcar, 5 lá mi milca maile, ve samir yú i nóri yar uar ista Eru. 6 Mauya in *úquen lahta i tea ar care úfailie hánoryan mi natto sina, an i Heru ahtaruva ilye taiti nati, ve anyárielme len nóvo ar *evettielme len. 7 An Eru ua vi-yalde úpoicienna, mal airitávesse. 8 Etta, ye ua cime ua loita cime atan, mal Eru, ye yú panya Aire Fearya lesse.

CHAPTER 4
Finally, brothers, we ask of you and encourage you by the Lord Jesus: As you received from us the knowledge about how it is necessary for you to behave and to please God, so you indeed behave, but do it more fully. 2 For you know the exhortations that we gave you through the Lord Jesus. 3 For so is God's will: That you will be hallowed – that you will keep yourselves away from fornication. 4 Thus it is necessary for everyone among you to possess his own vessel, in sanctification and in glory, 5 not in greedy lust, as have also the nations that do not know God. 6 It is necessary that no one crosses the line and does unjustice to his brother in this matter, for the Lord shall avenge all such things, as we have told you previously and have witnessed to you.
7 For God did not call us to uncleanness, but in sanctification. 8 Therefore, [anyone] who does not give heed does not fail to give heed to man, but to God, who also sets his Holy Spirit in you.

	9 Mal pa hánomelme ualde same maure i tecuvalme lenna, an elde nar peantane lo Eru i meluvalde quén i exe, 10 ar é carilde sie, melila i hánor quanda Maceroniasse. Mal hortalme le, hánor, i caruvalde sie ambe aqua, 11 ar i caruvalde ennelda i samuvalde quilda coivie, cimila vére nattoldar ar molila vére máldanten, ve cannelme len. 12 Sie polilde vanta mi vanima lé, ve cénaina lo i queni mí ette, ar mi maure muntava.

	9 But concerning brotherly love you do not have need that I will write to you, for you are instructed by God that you are to love one another, 10 and indeed you do so, loving the brothers in all of Macedonia. But we encourage you, brothers, that you will do so more fully, 11 and that you will make [it] your goal that you will have a quiet life, heeding your own matters and working with your own hands [dual], as we commanded you. 12 Thus you can walk in a proper manner, as seen by people on the outside, and in need of nothing.

	13 Mal hánor, ualme mere i nauvalde laistie pa i lornar. Sie ualde samuva i imya naire ya i exi samir, té i uar same estel. 14 An qui savilve i Yésus qualle ar enoronte, Eru yú taluva óse mí imya lé i aquálier ter Yésus. 15 An natto sina quetilve lenna Eruo quettanen: Elve, i coirear i lemyar tenna i Heruo entulesse, laume tuluvar epe i aquálier, 16 an i Heru inse tuluva undu menello as yello, as i óma héra valo ar arwa i hyólo Eruo, ar i qualinar Hristosse ortuvar minyave. 17 Epeta elve, i coirear i lemyar, nauvar rapane oa aselte mir i fanyar velien i Heru i vilyasse, ar sie nauvalve illume as i Heru. 18 Etta á tiuta quén i exe sine quettainen. 

	13 But brothers, we do not wish that you are to be ignorant about the slumbering ones [= the dead]. Thus would will not have the same grief that the others have, they that do not have hope. 14 For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, God will also bring with him in the same manner [those] that have died through Jesus. 15 For this matter we speak to you by God's word: We, the living ones that remain until the Lord's coming, will by no means come before [those] that have died, 16 for the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a cry, with the voice of a chief angel and having the trumpet of God, and the dead ones in Christ will rise first. 17 Thereafter we, the living ones who remain, will be snatched away with them into the coulds to meet the Lord in the air, and thus we will always be with the Lord. 18 Therefore comfort one another with these words.

RANTA 5
Mal pa i lúmi ar i lúr, hánor, ualde same maure in aiquen tece lenna. 2 An elde istar mai in i Héruo ré tuluva ve arpo i lómisse. 3 Íre quetilte: “Raine yo varnasse!”, tá nancarie rincenen tuluva téna, aqua ve i aice mapa lapselunga nís nó colis hínarya, ar laume uşuvalte. 4 Mal elde, hánor, uar i morniesse, ar sie i ré ua lantuva lenna ve arpo, 5 an illi mici le nar yondor calo ar yondor aureo. Ualve i lómio hya morniéno. 
	6 Etta, ávalve na lorne ve i exi, mal alve na coivie ar hepe laicelva. 7 An i lornar nar lorne lómisse, ar i quatir inte limpenen sucir limpe lómisse. 8 Mal elve i nar i aureo, alve hepe laicelva, colila i ambasse saviéva ar melmeva, ar ve cassa, i estel rehtiéva. 9 An Eru ua me-sante rúşen, mal camielvan rehtie ter Herulva, Yésus Hristo 10 ye qualle ven. Sie, coirear hya qualinar, coituvalve óse. 11 Etta á tiuta quén i exe sine quettainen, ar á carasta ama quén i exe, ve é cáralde.

CHAPTER 5
But concerning the times and moments, brothers, you do not have [any] need that anyone writes to you. 2 For you know well that the Lord's day will come like a thief in the night. 3 When they say: “Peace and security!”, then destruction will with a sudden twist come upon them, just as when the sharp pain seizes a woman heavy with child before she bears her child, and they will by no means escape. 4 But you, brothers, are not in the dark, and so the day will not fall upon you like a thief, 5 for all among you are sons of light and sons of day. We are not of the night or of darkness.
	6 Therefore, let us not be asleep like the others, but let us be awake and keep our keenness of perception. 7 For the slumbering ones are slumbering at night, and [those] that fill themselves with wine drink wine at night. 8 But we that are of the day, let us keep our keenness of perception, bearing the breastplate of faith and of love, and as a helmet, the hope of salvation. 9 For God did not reserve us for anger, but for our receiving salvation through our Lord, Jesus Christ 10 who died for us. Thus, [whether we now are] living ones or dead ones, we shall live with him. 11 Therefore comfort one another with these words, and build up one another, as indeed you are doing.

	12 Mal arcalme lello, hánor, cima i mótar mici le ar tulyar le ar tanar len i tie. 13 Sama túra áya tien, melmesse, molieltanen. Hepa raine mici inde. 14 Mal hortalme le, hánor: Á tana i téra tie i ráneain, queta tiutalénen innar penir huore, á manya i nar milye, sama cóle illin. 15 Cena i *uquen paitya ulcun ulcunen, mal illume á roita ya mára ná, quén i exen, ar illin. 
	16 Illume sama alasse. 17 Hyama oiale. 18 Pa ilqua á anta hantale, an ta ná Eruo indóme Yésus Hristosse elden. 19 Áva *luhtya i Faire. 20 Áva nattire quetie ve Erutercáno. 21 Á tyasta ilye nati; hepa yar máre nar. 22 Hepa inde oa ilya nostalello ulcuo. 
	23 Nai i Aino raineva immo airitauva le aqua! Nai fairelda ar fealda ar hroalda nauvar hépaine mi ilvana lé mí entulesse Herulvo, Yésus Hristo. 24 Isse ye le-yale voronda ná – ye yú caruvas sa.
	25 Hánor, hyama yú elmen!
	26 Á *suila ilye i hánor aire miquenen! 
	27 Canin len vandanen, mí Heru: Á et-henta tecetta sina ilye i hánoin.
	28 Nai Yésus Hristo Herulvo lisse euva aselde.

	12 But we ask of you, brothers, give heed to those that toil among you and and lead you and show you the way. 13 Have great awe for them, in love, because of [-nen] their work. Keep peace among yourselves. 14 But we urge you, brothers: Show the right [téra, straight] path to the errant ones, speak with comfort to [those] that lack courage, help the ones that are weak, have patience towards all. 15 See that nobody pays for evil with evil, but always pursue what is good, one for the other, and for all. 	
	16 Always have joy. 17 Pray ever. 18 About everything give thanks, for that is God's will in Jesus Christ for you. 19 Do not extinguish the Spirit. 20 Do not look down on speaking like a prophet. 21 Test all things; keep [the ones] that are good. 22 Keep yourselves away from every kind of evil.
	22 May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely! May your spirit and your soul and your body be kept in a perfect manner at the return of our Lord, Jesus Christ. 24 He who calls you is faithful – [he] who will also do it.
	25 Brothers, pray also for us!
	26 Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss!
	27 I command you by oath, in the Lord: Read out this letter to all the brothers.
	28 May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
