Pétero Attea Tenna

Second letter of Peter

---

RANTA 1
Símon Péter, Yésus Hristo mól ar apostel, innar acámier savie ve mirwa ve véralma, i faliénen Ainolvo ar *Rehtolvo, Yésus Hristo. 
	2 Nai samuvalde Erulisse ar raine úvesse, i istyanen pa Eru ar Yésus Hristo Herulva, 3 pan valaina túreryanen ánies ven ilqua ya tulya coivienna ar *ainocimienna, i istyanen pa ye vi-yalle alcarnen ar mariénen. 4 Sine natinen ánies ven i mirwe ar antúre vandar, samieldan ranta valaina nasseo, apa uºie i hastie ya ea i mardesse mailenen.

CHAPTER 1
Simon Peter, slave and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have received a faith as precious as our own, by the righteousness of our God and of our Savior, Jesus Christ.
	2 May you have grace and peace in abundance, by the knowledge about God and Jesus Christ our Lord, 3 since by his divine power he has given us everything that leads to life and to piety [ainocimie, heeding God], by the knowledge about [the one] who called us by glory and by goodness. 4 By these things he has given us the precious and greatest promises, for us to have a part in divine nature [nasse = true-being], after fleeing the marring that is in the world by lust.

	5 Sina castanen, ilya hormenen, alde napane savieldan márie, márieldan istya, 6 istyaldan *immoturie, *immoturieldan voronwie, voronwieldan *ainocimie, 7 *ainocimieldan hánonilme, hánonilmeldan melme. 8 An qui nati sine ear lesse úvesse, pustuvalte le návello ú cardaron hya yáveo apa istie Yésus Hristo Herulva.  9 An qui nati sine uar ea mi quén, náse *cénelóra hya *ºintacénea, ar ataltie enyalieryallo manen anes poitaina úcareryallon andanéya.  10 Etta, hánor, cara ilqua ya polilde carien tulca yalielda ar cilmelda, an sie cárala laume lantuvalde. 11 Sinen landa fenna nauva len letyaina mir i oira aranie Herulvo ar *Rehtolvo, Yésus Hristo. 

5 For this reason, with every urgency, you add to your faith goodness, to your goodness knowledge, 6 to your knowledge self-control, to your self-control endurance, to your endurance piety, 7 to your piety brotherly affection [hánonilme = brother-friendship], to your brotherly affection love. 8 For if these things exist in you in abundance, they will stop you from being without deeds or fruit after knowing Jesus Christ our Lord. 9 For if these things do not exist in a person, he is blind or short-sighted, and [it] has slipped from his recall how he was cleansed from his sins long ago. 10 Therefore, brothers, do everything that you can to make firm your calling and your choosing, for so doing you shall by no means fall. 11 In this way a broad door will be opened to you into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and of our Savior, Jesus Christ.

	12 Etta illume le-tyaruvan enyale nati sine, ómu istaldet ar nar tulce i nanwiesse ya ea lesse. 13 Mal íre en ean mi *lancoa sina notin vanima hortie le, tyariénen le enyale. 14 An istan i *lancoanya rato nauva panyaina oa, ve yando Yésus Hristo Herulva nin-carne sinwa. 15 Etta, ilya hormenen, caruvan ya ece nin, polieldan enyale nati sine apa autienya.
	16 Íre nyarnelme len pa i túre ar i tulie Yésus Hristo Herulvo, ualme enquete fincave autaine nyariéli; úsie, anelme astarmoli ar cenner melehterya vére hendulmanten. 17 An Eru Atarello camnes laitie ar alcar, íre síti quettali náner cóline senna lo i Meletya Alcar: «Si ná yondonya, meldanya, pa ye inye asánie mai.» 18 Ar quettar sine hlasselme cóline menello íre anelme óse i aire orontesse.

	12 Thus I will always cause you to recall these things, though you know them and are firm in the truth that exists in you. 13 But when I still exist in this tent I count [it] proper to urge you, by causing you to remember. 14 For I know that my tent soon will be put away, as also Jesus Christ our Lord made known to me. 15 Therefore, with every urgency, I will do what is possible for me, for you to be able to recall these things after my passing. 
	16 When we told you about the power and the coming of Jesus Christ our Lord, we did not repeat cleverly invented fables; on the contrary, we were bystanders and saw his majesty [or, might] with our own eyes.  17 For from God [the] Father he received honor and glory, when words like this were carried to him by the Majestic Glory: «This is my son, my beloved, of whom I have thought well.» 18 For these words we heard carried to him when we were with him on the holy mountain.

	19 Etta samilve i quetta i *Erutercánoron carna ambe tulca, ar cáralde mai cimiesse sa, ve mo cime calma caltala morna nómesse, tenna aure tule ar auretinwe orta endaldasse. 20 An or ilqua istalde i ua ea apacen i Tehtelesse ya tule aiqueno véra tercenello. 21 An apacen úne oi tulúna atano nirmenen, mal atalli caramper Erullo, nála cóline Aire Feanen.

	19 Therefore we have the word of the Prophets made more firm, and you are doing well in heeding it, as one heeds a lamp shining in a dark place, until day comes and a day-star rises in your heart. 20 For above everything you know that [there] does not exist [any] prophecy in the Scriptures that comes from anyone's own insight. 21 For a prophecy was not ever brought [in] by man's will, but some men [atan-li > atalli] spoke from God, being carried by Holy Spirit.

RANTA 2
Mal enger yando *hurutercánoli imíca i lie, ve euvar hurupeantalli mici lé. Té quildave tulúvar minna nancárala *hurupeantiéli ar laluvar yando i Heru ye mancane te insen, túlula linta nancarie intenna. 2 Ente, rimbali hilyuvar cardaltar lehta lengiéva, ar ténen i malle nanwiéva nauva naiquétina. 3 Nála milce, le-*yuhtuvalte véra *ñételtan, húrala quettalínen. Mal námielta vanwiello ua leve lencave, ar nancarielta ua lorna.

CHAPTER 2
But there were also some false prophets among the people, as there will be false teachers [hurupeantalli = huru-peantar-li] among you. They will quietly bring in destructive false teachings and deny even the Lord that traded them to himself, bringing a swift destruction upon themselves. 2 Furthermore, numerous ones will follow their deeds of loose conduct, and because of [-nen] them the road of truth will be blasphemed. 3 Being greedy, they will use you for their own gain, with lying words. But their judgement from of old does not move slowly, and their destruction is not asleep.

	4 An Eru ua pustanexe paimetiello i vali i úcarner, mal te-hante mir i undume ar antane te olla saptalin huinéva náven sátine námien. 5 Ente, uas pustanexe paimetiello i enwina mar, mal hempe Noha, tercáno failiéva, mi varnasse as hyane otso ire tulunes oloire mardenna olce quenion. Ente, namnes i ostu Sorom yo Omorra vistiénen tu mir asto, cárala raxetanwa olce quenin túlala randalissen. 7 Mal etelehtanes faila Lót, ye náne ita *tarastaina i lehta lengiénen ion tarner ºanyenna. 8 An *ºanyelóre cardaltainen, sana faila nér náne ñwalyaina faila fearyasse yainen cennes ar hlasses íre marnes imíca te. 9 Sie i Héru ista etelehta Erunildar et ºangiello, mal sate úfailar i auren namiéva. Tá nauvalte aucirne, 10 or ilqua i queni hilyala hráve mérala vahta sa, ar i nattirir hére.

	4 For God did not refrain from [lit. stop himself from] punishing the angels that sinned, but threw them into the abyss and gave them over to pits of gloom to be reserved for judgement. 5 Furthermore, he did not refrain from punishing the ancient world, but kept Noah, herald of righteousness, in safety with seven others when he brought a flood upon a world of wicked people. Furthermore, he judged the cities [ostu, dual] Sodom and Gomorrah by changing them [tu, dual] into dust, making [them] a danger-sign for wicked people in coming ages. 7 But he rescued righteous Lot, who was very troubled by the loose behavior of [those] who stood against law. 8 For by their lawless deeds, that just man was tormented in his just soul by [the things] which he saw and heard when he dwelt among them. 9 Thus the Lord knows [how] to rescue reverent [lit. God-friendly] ones out of trial, but to reserve [the] unjust ones for the day of judgement. Then they will be cut off, 10 above everything the people following flesh desiring to stain it, and [those] who despice lordship.

	Canye, *nirmunque, ualte pale epe alcarinquar, mal naiquetir, 11 ómu vali, i nar polde ar taure lá té, uar quete narace quettar namiéva ana te epe i Héru. 12 Mal queni sine, ve celvar ú handeo – nóne náven mapaine ar nancarne – nauvar hastaine véra hastieltanen, i natinen pa yar istalde munta ar yannar naiquetilte, 13 cárala ulco inten ve *paityale *úfailien. Ya notilte alasse ná marie úvesse. Nalte mordoli ar vaxeli, hírala úvea alasse húrala peantieltassen íre cariltexer merye aselde. 14 Hendultat illume cestat *imbacinde; ualte pole hepe inte úcarello, ar tyarilte iltance queni ranya. Endalta apárie maile. Húne hínali, 15 hehtala i téra malle, anaielte tulyaine mir ránea tie. Ihílielte tierya Valam Veorion, ye méle i *paityale uscaren, 16 mal camne *tulcarpie pa véra ºanyeracierya: Ómalóra celva cólava, carpala atano ómanen, pustane i úhandea lenda i *Erutercáno.

	Bold, willful, they do not tremble before glorious ones, but blaspheme, 11 though angels, that are stronger and mightier than them, do not speak harsh words of judgement against them before the Lord. 12 But these people, like animals without intellect – born to be seized and destroyed – will be corrupted by their own corruption, by the things of which they know nothing and against which they blaspheme, 13 doing evil to themselves as a payment for unrighteousness. What they count a joy is to dwell [or, live] in abundance. They are blots and stains, finding abundant joy in their lying teachings while they make themselves festive with you. 14 Their eyes always seek [cestat, dual] a harlot; they cannot keep themselves [away] from sin, and they cause unsteady people to stray. Their heart has learned lust. Accursed children, 15 abandoning the straight road, they have been led into an errant path. They have followed the path of Balaam son of Beor, who loved the reward for wrong-doing, 16 but received a rebuke concerning his own law-breaking: A voiceless beast of burden, speaking with a man's voice, stopped the witless journey of the prophet.

	17 Neri sine nar ehteléli ú neno, híºiéli cóline raumonen, ar tien i huine morniéva ná sátina. 18 An quetilte hoe quettali yar carir munta mára, ar i hráveo írinen ar lehte haimalínen tyarilte ranya i *ºintanéya úºer i quenillon ion lengie ná ránea. 19 Ómu antalte tien vandali pa lérie, té nar *hastaleo móli. An ye ná turúna lo exe, ná sina exeo mól. 20 An qui, apa uºie i mardo vaxellon, istyanen pa i Heru ar *Rehto Yésus Hristo, nalte ata rembine lo nati sine ar nar turúne, tá i métime nattor nar ulce tien lá i minye. 21 An qui ualte oi sinte i tie failiéva, tá náne tien arya lá querie inte oa sallo apa istie i aire axan antaina tien. 22 I nanwa equesso quetie ten-amartie: «I huo enutúlie véra *quamnaryanna, ar i polca ya náne sóvina, pelienna i luxusse.»

	17 These men are springs without water, mists carried by storm, and for them the gloom of darkness is reserved. 18 For they speak big words that do nothing good, and by the desire of the flesh and by loose habits they cause those to stray those that a short time ago fled from the people whose conduct is errant. 19 Though they give them promises about freedom, they are slaves of corruption. For [he] who is conquered by another, is this other one's slave. 20 For if, after fleeing from the stains [or, defilements] of the world, by the knowledge about the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled by these things and are overwon, then the last affairs are more evil to them than the first. 21 For if they did not ever know the path of righteousness, that was to them better than turning themselves away from it after knowing the holy commandment given to them. 22 The saying of the true proverb has happened to them: «The dog has returned to its own vomit, and the pig that was washed, to rolling in the mud.»

RANTA 3
Meldar, tenna sina ná i attea ya técan lenna, yasse, ve minyanyasse, valtan sámalda cuiva handenna *rentiénen le, 2 enyalieldan i quetier nóvo quétine lo i airi *Erutercánor ar i axan i Heruo ar *Rehto ter i aposteli mentaine lenna. 3 An istalde si or ilqua, i mí métime auri tuluvar *naiquétoli quétala yaiwe, lengala ve vére íreltar 4 ar quétala: «Masse sina entulesse pa ya ánes vanda? An atarilmar nar qualini, mal ilqua ná ena ve anaies ontiéno yestallo.» 
	5 Véra íreltanen ualte tunta si, i enget menel cemenye vanwiesse, ortala et i nenillon ar endesse neno Eruo quettanen, 6 ar tane neninen i enwina mar náne nancarna, nála oloiyaina nennen.7 Mal i imya quettanen i menel cemenye yat eat sí nát martyaine ruiven ar nát sátine i auren námiéva, yasse atani cotye Erun nauvar nancarne.

CHAPTER 3
Beloved ones, this letter is the second that I am writing to you, in which, as in my first, I stir your heart to a wakeful understanding by reminding you, 2 for you to recall the sayings beforehand spoken by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through the apostles sent to you. 3 For you know this above everything, that in the last days will come blasphemers speaking mockery, behaving according to their own desires 4 and saying: «Where is this return of which he gave promise? For our fathers are dead, but everything is still as it has been from the beginning of creation.»
	5 By their own desire they do not perceive this, that there existed [enget, dual] a heaven and an earth in [the] past, rising out of the waters and in midst of water by God's word, 6 and by those waters the ancient world was destroyed, being inundated with water. 7 But by the same word the heaven and earth that exist [yat eat, dual] now are [nát, dual] destined for fire and are reserved for the day of judgement, in which men hostile to God will be destroyed.

	8 Mal a meldar, áva loita tunta si: I Hérun erya ré ná ve loar húme, ar loar húme ve erya ré. 9 I Héru ui lenca *amaquatiesse vandarya, ve quelli notir lencie, mal tanas cóle len, pan uas mere i aiquen nauva nancarna, mal i illi hiruvar inwis. 10 Ono i Heruo aure tuluva ve arpo, yasse menel autuva túra ramesse, mal i meneldie hrondor *ticuvar rúcima úresse, ar cemen ar yar anaier cárine sasse nauvar apantaine.
	11 Pan ilye nati sine ticuvar oa, á hanya mana i nostale quenion ya mauya len náve, airi cardalínen ar lengiénen ar carielínen ainocimiéva, 12 íre yétalde ompa i Heruo aurenna ar hortar i tulie enta aureo, yanen menel, nála ruivesse, tique ar i meneldie hrondor tiquir oa rúcima úresse. 13 Mal vandaryanen yétalve ompa vinya menelenna ar vinya cemenna, yatse failie maruva.

	8 But beloved ones, do not fail to perceive this: To the Lord a single day is like a thousand years, and thousand years as a single day. 9 The Lord is not slow in fulfilling his promise, as some count slowness, but he shows patience to you, since he does not wish that anyone will be destroyed, but that all will find repentance. 10 But the day of the Lord will come as a thief, in which  heaven will pass away with [lit. in] a great noice, but the heavenly bodies will melt [ticuva- future of tiqu-] in a terrible heat, and earth and [the things] that have been done in it shall be revealed.
	11 Since all these things will melt away, understand what is the kind of people it is necessary for you to be, by holy deeds and conduct and doings of reverence [God-heeding], 12 while you look forward to the Lord's day and speed up the coming of that day, in which heaven, being on fire, melts and the heavenly bodies melt away in a terrible heat. 13 But by his promise we look forward to a new heaven and a new earth, in which [yatse, dual] righteousness shall dwell.

	14 Etta, meldar, pan yétalde ompa sine natinnar, cara ilqua ya polilde náven hírina ú vaxeo hya mordo, ar rainesse. 15 Ente, nota Herulvo cóle ve ecie rehtiéva, aqua ve Paulo, melda hánolva, yando tence len i sailiénen antaina sen, 16 carpala pa nati sine ve caris ilye tennaryassen. Mal mi tai ear natali yar nar urde hanien, yar i úpeantainar ar i iltancar rícar, ve yando ricilte i hyane tehteler, véra nancarieltan. 
	17 Etta, a meldar, pan elde istar si nóvo, cima i ualde tulyaine oa aselte i loimanen ion tarir i ªanyenna, ar lantar véra voronweldallo. 18 Mal ala i Erulissenen ar i istyanen pa Herulva ar *Rehtolva, Yésus Hristo. Na sen i alcar, sí ar oireo auresse véla. 

	14 Therefore, beloved ones, since you look forward to these things, do everything that you can to be found without stain or blot, and at peace. 15 Furthermore, count our Lord's patience as an opportunity for [-va] salvation, just like Paul, our beloved brother, also wrote to you by the wisdom given him, 16 speaking of these things as he does in all his letters. But in them [there] are some things that are difficult to understand, which the untaught and the unsteady twist, as they also twist the other Scriptures, to their own undoing. 
	17 Therefore, beloved ones, since you know this beforehand, take heed that you are not led away with them by the error of those who stand against the Law, and fall from your own steadfastness. 18 But thrive [or, grow] by the grace and by the knowledge about our Lord and our Savior, Jesus Christ. To him be the glory, now and in the day of eternity alike. 

