Yoháno Apantie

Revelation of John

[Revision of April 2019]

---

RANTA 1
Yésus Hristo apantie, ya Eru sen-antane, tanáven núroryain yar ron martuvar. Mentanes valarya ar sa-carne sinwa tanwalínen Yoháno núroryan, 2 ye *vettane pa i quetta Eruo ar i *vettie pa Yésus Hristo, ilqua ya cennes. 3 Valima ná ye et-henta, ar valime nar i hlarir i quettar i apacéno ar i cimir yar nar técine sasse, an i lúme hare ná.

CHAPTER 1
The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his servants [the things] that soon will happen. He sent his angel and made it known in signs to John [Johannes] his servant, 2 who witnessed about the word of God and the witness about Jesus Christ, everything that he saw. 3 Happy is the one who reads aloud, and happy are [those] who hear the words of the prediction [or, prophecy] and [those] who heed [the things] that are written in it, for the time is near.

	4 Yoháno i ocombennar otso Ásiasse: Lisse ar raine len ho ye ea ar ye enge ar ye tuluva, ar i fairellon otso i ear epe mahalmarya, 5 ar Yésus Hristollo, i Voronda *Vetto, i Minnóna Qualinallon, ar i Tur aranion cemeno. Yen mele vi ar eleryanie vi úcarilvallon véra serceryanen 6 – ar vi-carne aranie, airimor Ainoryan ar Ataryan – na sen i alcar ar i túre tennoio! Násie!

4 John to the seven congregations in Asia: Grace and peace to you from [the one] who is and who was and who shall come, and from the seven spirits that are before his throne, 5 and from Jesus Christ, the Faithful Witness, the Firstborn out of the Dead, and the Ruler of [the] kings of earth. To [the one] who loves us and who has freed us from our sins with his own blood 6 – and made us a kingdom, priests for his God and his Father – be to him the glory and the power forever! Amen!

	7 Yé! Túlas as i fanyar, ar ilya hen cenuva se, yú i *terner se; ar ilye nossi cemeno palpuvar inte nairesse issenen. Ná, násie!
	8 “Inye Tinco ar Úre,” quete i Héru Eru, “i ea ar i enge ar i tuluva, i Iluvala.”

7 Behold! He is coming with the clouds, and every eye shall see him, also those who pierced him; and all tribes of earth shall beat themselves in grief because of him. Yes, amen!
	8 “I am Tinco and Úre [= Alpha and Omega]”, says the Lórd God, “[the one] who is and who was and who shall come, the Almighty.”

	9 Inye Yoháno, hánolda ye same ranta aselde i şangiesse ar araniesse ar voronwiesse mi Yésus, enge i tollosse estaina Patmos quetiénen pa Eru ar *vettiénen pa Yésus. 10 I Héruo auresse anen fairesse, ar hlassen ca ni taura óma ve hyólallo, 11 quétala: “Teca ya cenil parmasse ar ása menta i ocombennar otso, mi Efesus ar Mirna ar Peryamum ar Şiatíra ar Sardis ar Filarelfia ar Laoricea.”

9 I John, your brother who has a share with you in the tribulation and the kingdom and the faithfulness in Jesus, was on the island called Patmos because of speaking about God and because of witnessing about Jesus. 10 On the day of the Lord I was in spirit, and I heard behind me a mighty voice like from a trumpet, 11 saying: “Write [that] which you see in a book and send it to the seven congregations, in Ephesus and Smyrna and Pergamum and Thyatira and Sardis and Philadelphia and Laodicea.”

	12 Quernen immo cenien mano óma quente ninna, ar apa querie cennen calmatarmar otso maltava, 13 ar i endesse i calmatarmaron quén ve atanyondo, vaina vaimasse ya rahtane talyanta ar  arwa laurea quilto nútina *os i ambas. 14 Ente, carya ar findelerya náner ninqui ve ninque tó, ve losse, ar henyat ve uruite ruine.

12 I turned [Q: I turned myself] to see whose voice spoke to me, and after turning I saw seven lampstands of gold, 13 and in the midst of the lampstands one [or, a person] like a son of man, clad in a robe that reached to his feet and having a golden belt bound about the chest. 14 Furthermore, his head and his hair were white like white wool, like snow, and his eyes like a fiery flame.

15 Talyat nánet ve laurea urus, lúşina urnasse, ar ómarya náne ve i lamma rimbe nenion. 16 Formaryasse sámes tinwi otso; et antoryallo lende aica andamacil arwa címa atto. Cendelerya calle ve íre Anar cala túreryasse. 17 Íre cennenyes lantanenye ve qualina epe talyat. Panyanes formarya to ni ar quente: “Áva ruce! Inye i Minya ar i Métima 18 ar i coirea ná; ar anen qualina, mal yé! nanye coirea tennoio ar oi, ar samin i *latili ñuruo ar Mandosto.

15 His feet were like gold-colored copper, glowing in an oven [or, furnace], and his voice was like the sound of many waters. 16 In his right hand he had seven stars; out of his mouth went a sharp, two-edged  longsword having two edges. His face shone as when the Sun shines in its power. 17 When I saw him I fell like dead before his feet. He put his right hand on me and said: “Do not fear! I am the First and the Last 18 and the living; and I was dead, but behold! I am alive forever and ever, and I have the keys to death and to Mandos [here used = Hades, the realm of the dead].

19 Etta teca yar ecéniel, yar ear sí ar yar martuvar apa si véla. 20 Pa i fóle i tinwion otso yar cennel formanyasse, ar i calmatarmaron otso: i tinwi otso nar vali i ocombion otso, ar i calmatarmar otso nar i ocombi otso.”

19 Therefore write [the things] that you have seen, [the ones] that are now and [the ones] that shall happen after this alike. 20 About [or, As for] the secret of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand, and of the seven lampstands: the seven stars are angels of the seven congregations, and the seven lampstands are the seven congregations.”

RANTA 2
“I valanna i ocombeo Efesusse teca: Sin quete ye same i tinwi otso formaryasse, ye vanta endesse i calmatarmaron otso maltava:

CHAPTER 2
To the angel of the congregation in Ephesus write: This says [he] who has the seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven lampstands of gold:

2 Istan cardalyar ar molielya ar voronwielya, ar i ual pole cole ulce queni, ar i atyastiel i quetir i nalte aposteli, mal uar, ar hirnel i hurilte. 3 Yú voronwie samil, ar anaiel şorna essenyan, ar ual olólie lumba. 4 Ananta samin ana lye i ehehtiel i melme ya sámel i yestasse.

2 I know your deeds and your labour and your faithfulness, and that you cannot bear evil people, and that you have tried [the ones] who say that they are apostles, but are not, and you have found that they lie. 3 Also endurance you have, and you have been steadfast for [the sake of] my name, and you have not become tired. 4 And yet I have against you that you have forsaken the love that you had in the beginning.

	5 Etta enyala yallo alantiel, ar hira inwis ar cara i minye cardar. Qui lalye, túlan lenna, ar mapuvan oa calmatarmalya nómeryallo, qui ual hire inwis. 6 Ananta é samil si, i tevil i cardar i Nicolaiyaron, yar yú inye teve. 7 Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar: Yen same i apaire antauvan mate i Aldallo Coiviéva, ya ea i tarwasse Eruva.

5 Therefore remember [that] which you have fallen from, and find repentance and do the first deeds. If you do not, I am coming to you, and I shall take away your lampstand from its place, if you do not find repentance. 6 And yet you do have this, that you hate the doings of the Nicolaitans, which also I loathe. 7 May [the one] who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations: To [him] who conquers I shall give [permission] to eat from the Tree of Life, which is in the garden of God.

	8 Ar i valanna i ocombeo Mirnasse teca: Sin quete i Minya ar i Métima, ye náne qualina ar nanwenne coivienna: 9 Istan şangielya ar únielya – mal nalye lárea – ar i yaiwe ion estar inte Yúrar, ananta ualte, mal nar Sátano *yomencoa: 10 Áva ruce i ñwalmallon yar sí tuluvar lyenna. Yé! I Arauco sí hatuva ennoli mici le mir mando, náveldan aqua tyastane, ar i samuvalde şangie ter rí quean. Na voronda tenna ñuru, ar lyen-antauvan i ríe coiviéva. 11 Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar: Ye turue laume nauva malana i attea ñurunen.

8 And to the angel of the congregation in Smyrna write: This says the First and the Last, who was dead and came back to life: 9 I know your tribulation and your poverty – but you are rich – and the mockery of [those] who call themselves Jews, and yet they are not, but are Satan’s synagogue: 10 Do not fear the torments that now will come upon you. Look! The Devil [or, Demon] will now throw some [lit. “some persons”, ennoli] among you into prison, for you to be wholly tested, and that you will have tribulation for [lit. through] ten days [rí, pl. of ré]. Be faithful until death, and I shall give you the crown of life. 11 May he who has an [ear] hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations: [He] who has victory will by no means be harmed by the second death.

	12 Ar i valanna i ocombeo Peryamumesse teca: Sin quete ye same i aica andamacil arwa címa atto: 13 Istan masse marilye, yasse ea i tarhanwa Sátanwa; ananta hépal essenya. Ual lalane savielya nisse yando mi réryar Antipas voronda *vettonya, ye náne nanca ara lye, yasse mare Sátan.

12 And to the angel of the congregation in Pergamum write: This says [he] who has the sharp longsword having two edges: 13 I know where you dwell, [the place] in which the throne of Satan is; and yet you are keeping my name. You did not deny your faith in me also [or, even] in the days of Antipas my faithful witness, who was slain by your side, where Satan dwells.

	14  Ananta samin nótime nattoli ana lye, in ear aselye i hepir i peantave Valamo, ye peantane Valacen panie sar taltiéva epe Israelindi, ar sie mantelte yar náner *yácine cordonin ar *hrupuhtaner. 15 Sie ear yú aselye i hepir i peantave i Nicolaiyaron. 16 Etta hira inwis! Qui lalye, tuluvan lyenna ron, ar mahtuvan téna antonyo macilden.

14 And yet I hold a few matters against you, that there are with you [those] who keep the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block [sar taltiéva, a stone of slipping/collapsing] before the sons of Israel, and so they ate [things] that were sacrificed to idols and fornicated. 15 Thus there are also with you [those] who keep the teaching of the Nicolaitans. 16 Therefore find repentance! If you do not, I will come to you soon, and I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.

	17 Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar: Yen turue antauvan i nurtana máno, ar antauvan sen ninque sar, ar to i sar vinya esse lá sinwa aiquenen, hequa ye came sa.

	17 May he who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations: To [him] who conquers I shall give [some] of the hidden mán [manna], and I shall give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name not known to anyone, except [the one] who receives it.

	18 Ar i valanna i ocombeo Şiatírasse teca: Sin quete i Eruion, ye same henyat ve uruite ruine, ar talyat ve urus: 19 Istan cardalyar ar melmelya ar savielya ar núromolielya ar voronwielya, ar anvinye cardalyar nar ambe lá i minyar.

18 And to the angel of the congregation in Thyatira write: This says the Son of God, who has his eyes like a fiery flame, and his feet like copper: 19 I know your deeds and your love and your faith and your service [lit. servant-work] and your faithfulness, and your newest deeds are more than the first ones.

	20 Ananta samin ana lye in ual pusta i nís Yesavel, ye esta immo *Erutercáne, ar peantas ar tyaris ranya núronyar mir carie *úpuhtale, ar matie nati *yácine cordonin. 21 Antanen sen lúme hirien inwis, mal uas mere cesta inwis pa *hrupuhtalerya. 22 Yé! Hatuvanyes mir caima, ar i *hrupuhtar óse mir túra şangie, qui ualte hire inwis pa cardaryar. 23 Ar hínaryar lavuvan ñurun mapa, tyarien ilye i ocombi ista in inye ná ye ceşe sámar ar endar, ar antauvan ilquenen mici le ve cardaldar nar.

20 And yet I hold against you that you do not stop the woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophet [a heraldess of God], and teaches and causes to err my servants into doing [/committing] fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to idols. 21 I gave her time to find repentance, but she does not want to seek repentance for [pa = about] her fornication. 22 Look! I throw her into bed, and [the ones] who fornicate with her into a great tribulation, if they do find repentance concerning her deeds. 23 And her children I will let death take, to cause all the congregations to know that I am [the one] who searches minds and hearts, and I shall give to everyone among you according as your deeds are.

24 Mal quetin i exennar mici le Şiatírasse, illinnar i uar same peantave sina ar uar isistie 'i tumne nati Sátano', ve quetilte: Uan panya lesse hyana cólo. 25 Ananta hepa ya samil, tenna tuluvan. 26 Ar ye turue ar cime cardanyar tenna i metta, sen antauvan hére or nóri.

24 But I say to the others among you in Thyatira, to all who do not have this teaching and have not known ‘the deep things of Satan’, as they say: I do not put on you [any] other burden. 25 And yet, keep what you have, until I shall come. 26 And [he] who conquers and heeds my deeds until the end, to him I shall give him lordship over [the] nations.

27 Turuvas tai angaina vandilden, náveltan rácine mir mittar ve cemne veni – i imya hére ya inye acámie Atarinyallo. 28 Ar antauvan sen i arintinwe. 29 Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!”

27 He shall rule them with an iron rod, for them to be broken into pieces like earthen vessels – the same lordship [or, authority] that I have received from my Father. 28 And I shall give him the morning star. 29 May [the one] who has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the congregations!”

RANTA 3
“Ar i valanna i ocombeo Sardisse teca: Sin quete ye same i fairi otso Eruva ar i tinwi otso: Istan cardalyar, i nalye coirea essenen – mal nalye qualina.

CHAPTER 3
“And to the angel of the congregation in Sardis write: This says [he] who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars: I know your deeds, that you are alive by name – but you are dead.

2 Ola cuiva ar á turya i nati lemyala yar nar hari qualmenna, an uan ihírie cardalyar telyane epe Ainonya. 3 Etta enyala manen acámiel ar manen hlassel, ar ása hepe, ar hira inwis! Qui ual oluva cuiva, tuluvan ve arpo, ar laume istuval i lúme yasse tuluvan lyenna.

2 Become awake and strengthen the things remaining that are near to death, for I have not found your deeds completed before my God. 3 Therefore recall how you have received and how you heard, and keep it, and find repentance! If  you do not become awake, I shall come like a thief, and you will by no means know the hour in which I shall come upon you.

	4 Ananta é samil annótime esseli Sardisse i uar avahtie lanneltar, ar vantuvalte asinye mi ninque, an nalte valde. 5 Ye turue nauva sie vaina ninqui lannelínen, ar laume mapuvan oa esserya i Parmallo Coiviéva, mal caruvan sinwa in esserya ná istanwa lo ni epe Atarinya ar epe valaryar. 6 Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!

4 And yet you do have a few names in Sardis who have not stained their clothes, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. 5 [He] who has victory will thus be clad in white clothes, and I shall by no means take away his name from the Book of Life, but I shall make known that his name is acknowledged by me before my Father and before his angels . 6 May [he] who has a hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations!

7 Ar i valanna i ocombeo Filarelfiasse teca: Sin quete ye aire ná, ye şanda ná, ye same Laviro *latil, ye latya mi lé pustala aiquen holtiello, ar holta mi lé pustala aiquen latyavello: 8 Istan cardalyar – yé! apánien epe lye latyana fenna, ya *úquen pole holta. An elye same pitya melehte, mal hempel quettanya ar ua lalane essenya.

7 And to the angel of the congregation in Philadelphia write: This says [he] who is holy, who is true, who has David’s key, who opens in a manner stopping anyone from closing, and closes in a manner stopping anyone from opening: 8 I know your deeds – behold! I have placed before you an opened door, which nobody can close. For you have little might, but you kept my word and did not deny my name.

9 Yé! I queni *yomencoallo Sátanwa, i estar inte Yúrar ananta uar, mal húrar – yé! tyaruvanyet tule ar lanta undu epe talulyat, ar tyaruvanyet ista i emélien lye. 10 Pan ehépiel i quetta voronwienyo, yú inye lye-hepuva i lúmello tyastiéva ya tuluva i quanda ambarenna, tyastien i marir cemende. 11 Tuluvan ron. Hepa ya samil, pustien aiquen mapiello ríelya.

9 Behold! The people from the synagogue of Satan, who call themselves Jews and yet are not, but are lying – behold! I shall cause them to come and fall down before your feet, and I shall make them know that I have loved you. 10 Because you have kept the word of my faithfulness, I too will keep you from the hour of trial that shall come upon the whole world, to test those who dwell on earth. 11 I will come soon. Keep [that] which you have, to stop anyone from taking your crown.

12 Ye turue caruvan tarma i cordasse Ainonyava, ar laume oi etelelyuvas, ar tecuvan sesse i esse Ainonyava ar i esse i osto Ainonyava, i vinya Yerúsalem ya tule undu menello Ainonyallo, ar yú ninya vinya esse. 13 Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!

12 [He] who conquers I shall make a pillar in the temple of my God, and by no means will he ever go out, and I will write upon him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven from my God, and also my own new name. 13 May [he] who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations!

14 Ar i valanna i ocombeo Laoriceasse teca: Sin quete i Násie, i voronda ar şanda *Vetto, i Yesta ontiéno Eruo: 15 Istan cardalyar, in ual ringa hya lauca. Auve anel ringa hya lauca! 16 Etta, pan nalye *pellauca, ar lá lauca hya ringa, quamuvanyel et antonyallo. 17 Pan quetil: “Nanye lárea, nanye herenya; samin maure muntava” – mal ual ista in elye angayanda ar *nainima ar úna ar *cénelóra ar helda ná – 18 quetin lyenna i caril mai qui mancal nillo malta poitana nárenen, návelyan lárea, ar ninqui larmar, návelyan vaina ar pustien heldielyo nucumnie návello tanana, ar laive panien hendulyatse, cenielyan.

14 And to the angel of the congregation in Laodicea write: Thus says the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, [the] Beginning of [the] creation of God: 15 I know your deeds, that you are not cold or hot. Would that you were cold or hot! 16 Therefore, since you are lukewarm, and not hot or cold, I shall vomit you out of my mouth. 17 Since you say: “I am rich, I am wealthy; I have need of nothing” – but you do not know that you are miserable and lamentable and destitute and blind and naked – 18 I say to you that you do well if you buy [lit. trade] from me gold purified by fire, for you to be rich, and white garments, for you to be clad and to stop the humiliation of your nakedness from being shown, and salve to put on your eyes, for you to see.

19 Illin i melin inye anta naitie ar paimesta. Etta á lenga holmo, ar hira inwis! 20 Yé! Táran epe i fenna, tambala. Qui aiquen hlare ómanya ar latya i fenna, tuluvan mir coarya, ar matuvan i *şinyemat óse, ar isse asinye. 21 Yen turue antauvan hame undu óni mahalmanyasse, tambe inye turune ar hamune as Atarinya mahalmaryasse. 22 Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!”

19 To all that I love I give rebuke and chastisement. Therefore behave sincerely, and find repentance! 20 Behold! I am standing before the door, knocking. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I shall come into his house, and I shall eat the evening meal with him and he with me. 21 To [him] who conquers I shall give [permission] to sit down with me on my throne, like I conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne. 22 May [he] who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations!”

RANTA 4
Apa si cennen, ar yé! fenna latyana menelde. Ar i minya óma ya hlassen quéta óni náne ve i lamma hyólo, ar eques: “Tula ama sir, ar lyen-tanuvan yar ron martuvar.” 2 Mí imya lú túlen nu i túre i Faireo, ar yé! enge mahalma menelde, ar Quén hande i mahalmasse.

CHAPTER 4
After this I saw, and behold! a door [that was] opened in heaven. And the first voice that I heard speak with me was like the sound of a trumpet, and it said: “Come up hither, and I shall show you [the things] that will soon happen.” 2 In the same moment I came under the power of the Spirit, and behold! there was a throne in heaven, and One sat on the throne.

3 Ilce yeo hára tasse ná ve *nambíre ar *culmíre, ar *os i mahalma ea helyanwe, ve *laimaril ilcesse. 4 Ar *os i mahalma ear mahalmar canta *yúquean, ar i mahalmassen hárar amyárar canta *yúquean sámala ninqui larmar, ar ríer maltava cariltasse. 5 Ar et i mahalmallo túlar ítar ar ómar ar hundier, ar ear calmar otso uryala epe i mahalma, yar nar i fairi otso Eruo. 6 Ar epe i mahalma ea ya neme ve ailin calcava.

3 The appearance of [him] who is sitting there is like jasper and carneol, and around the throne there is a rainbow, like an emerald in appearance. 4 And around the throne there are four [and] twenty thrones, and on the thrones [there] are sitting four [and] twenty elders having white raiments, and thrones of gold on their head. 5 And out of the throne are coming flashes and voices and thunders, and there are seven lamps burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. 6 And before the throne there is [something] that seems like a lake of glass.

	I endesse yasse i mahalma tare, *os i mahalma ear coiti canta, quante hendion epe ar cata: 7 i minya coite ná ve rá, i attea ve mondo, i neldea same cendele ve atano, ar i cantea ná ve vilila şoron. 8 Ilya quén i coition canta same rámar enque, ar ilya coite ná quanta hendion *os quanda hroarya ar mityave. Sére ualte same, auresse yo lómisse quétala: “Aire, aire, aire ná i Héru Eru Iluvala, ye ea ar ye enge ar ye tuluva!”

	In the middle where the throne stands, around the throne [there] are four living creatures [coite = living being], full of eyes before and behind: 7 the first living creature is like a lion, the second like an ox, the third has a face like a man’s, and the fourth is like a flying eagle. 8 Every one of the four living creatures had six wings, and each living creature is full of eyes around his entire body and inside [mityave, adv.]. Rest they do not have, at day and and night saying: “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, who is and who was and who shall come!”

	9 Ar mí ilya lú ya i coiti antar alcar ar laitale ar hantale yen hára i mahalmasse, ye coita tennoio ar oi, 10 i amyárar canta *yúquean lantar undu epe ye hára i mahalmasse ar *tyerir ye coita tennoio ar oi, ar hatilte ríeltar epe i mahalmanna, quétala: 11 “Elye ná valda, Herulma ar Ainolma, camiéno i alcar ar i laitie ar i túre, an ontanel ilye nati, ar indómelyanen engelte ar náner ontane.”

9 And every time that the living creatures give glory and praise and thank to [him] who is sitting on the throne, who lives forever and ever, 10 the four [and] twenty elders fall down before [him] who is sitting on the throne and worship [him] who lives forever and ever, and they throw their crones before [lit. to before] the throne, saying: 11 “You are worthy, our Lord and our God, of receiving the glory and the honor and the power, for you created all things, and by your will they existed and were created.”

RANTA 5
Ar cennen i formasse yeo hande i mahalmasse parma técina mityave ar i ettesse, *lihtana *lihtainen otso. 2 Ar cennen polda vala ye yáme taura ómanen: “Man ná valda pantiéno i parma ar raciéno *lihtaryar?” 3 Mal *úquen menelde hya cemende hya nu cemen lertane panta i parma hya yéta minna sa. 4 Ar anen turúna túra yaimenen, an *úquen náne hirna valda pantiéno i parma hya yétiéno minna sa. 5 Mal quén i amyáraron quete ninna: “Áva na yaimea! Yé! I Rá ye ná Yehúro nosseo, Laviro şundo, utúruye ar lerta panta i parma ar *lihtaryar otso.”

CHAPTER 5
And I saw in the right hand of [he] who sat on the throne a book written on the inside [mityave, adv.] and on the outside, sealed with seven seals. 2 And I saw a strong angel who cried out with a mighty voice: “Who is worthy of opening the book and of breaking its seals?” 3 But nobody in heaven or on earth or under earth might open the book or look into it. 4 And I was overcome by a great wailing, for nobody was found worthy of opening the book or of looking into it. 5 But one of the elders says to me: “Do not be wailing! Look! The Lion who is of the tribe of Judah, David’s root, has conquered and may open the book and its seven seals.”

6 Ar cennen tárala endesse i mahalmo ar i coition canta, ar endesse i amyáraron, eule ye sáme i ilce náveo nanca, arwa rassion otso ar hendion otso, yar nar Eruo fairi otso, i mentanar mir i quanda cemen. 7 Ar lendes ar nampe i parma et formallo yeo hande i mahalmasse. 8 Ar íre nampes i parma, i coiti canta ar i amyárar canta *yúquean lantaner undu epe i Eule, ilya quén sámala ñande ar tolpor maltava yar náner quante *nisqueo – ya ná i hyamier i airion. 9 Ar lirilte vinya líre, quétala: “Nalye valda mapiéno i parma ar pantiéno *lihtaryar, an anel nanca, ar sercelyanen urúniel ennoli Erun et ilya nossello ar lambello ar nórello. 10 Acárielyet aranie ar *airimor Ainolvan, ar turuvalte cemende.”

6 And I saw standing in midst of the throne and the four living creatures, and in midst of the elders, a lamb that had the appearance of being slain [slaughtered], having seven horns and seven eyes, which are God’s seven spirits, the ones sent into the entire earth. 7 And it went and took the book out of the right hand of [him] who sat on the throne. 8 And when it took the book, the four living creatures and the four [and] twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, every one having a harp and bowls of gold that were full of incense – which is the prayers of the holy ones. 9 And they sing a new song, saying: “You are worthy of taking the book and of opening its seals, for you were slain, and with your blood you have redeemed people for God out of every tribe and tongue and nation. 10 You have made them a kingdom and priests for our God, and they shall rule on earth.”

11 Ar cennen, ar hlassen óma rimbe valalion *os i mahalma ar i coiti ar i amyárar, ar nótelta náne ve *quaihúmi *quaihúmion ar húmi húmion, 12 quétala taura ómanen: “I Eule ye náne nahtana ná valda camiéno i túre ar alma ar sailie ar poldore ar laitie ar alcar ar aistie.”  

11 And I saw, and I heard a voice of numerous angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders, and their number was like myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, 12 saying with a mighty voice: “The Lamb that was slain is worthy of receiving the power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honor [laitie, praising] and glory and blessing.”

13 Ar ilya onna ye ea mi menel cemenye ar nu cemen ar i earesse, ar ilye i nati tais, hlassen quéta: “Yen hára i mahalmasse ar i Eulen na i aistie ar i laitie ar i alcar ar i melehte tennoio ar oi.” 14 Ar i coiti canta quenter: “Násie!”, ar i amyárar lantaner undu ar *tyerner.

	13 And every creature that exists in heaven and earth and under earth and in the sea, and all the things in them, I heard say: “To [him] who is sitting on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing and the honor and the might forever and ever.” 14 And the four living creatures said: “So be it!”, and the elders fell down and worshiped.

RANTA 6
Ar cennen íre i Eule latyane mine i *lihtaron otso, ar hlassen quén i coition canta quéta ómanen ve hundier: “Tula!” 2 Ar cennen, ar yé! ninque rocco, ar ye hamme sesse sáme quinga; ar ríe náne sen antana, ar etelendes túrula ar turuyen.

CHAPTER 6
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunders: “Come!” 2 And I saw, and look! a white horse, and [he] who sat upon it had a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went forth conquering and to conquer.

	3 Ar íre latyanes i attea *lihta, hlassen i attea coite quéta: “Tula!” 4 Ar exe ettúle, narwa rocco; ar yen hamme sesse náne antana mapa raine oa cemello, nahtieltan quén i exe; ar haura macil náne sen antana.

3 And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say: “Come!” 4 And another came out, a fiery-red horse; and to [him] who sat on it [it] was given to take peace away from earth, for them to slay one another; and a huge sword was given to him.

	5 Ar íre latyanes i neldea *lihta, hlassen i neldea coite quéta: “Tula!” Ar cennen, ar yé! more rocco; ar ye hamme sesse sáme tolpot máryatse. 6 Ar hlassen ya náne ve óma endesse i coition canta quéta: “Lesta oriva *aurepaityalen, ar lestar nelde *findoriva *aurepaityalen, ar áva mala i millo ar i limpe.”

And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say: “Come!” And I saw, and look! a black horse, and [he] who sat on it had a pair of scales [tolpot, dual of “bowl”] in his hands. 6 And I heard [something] that was like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures say: “A measure of grain for a day’s wages, and three measures of barley for a day’s wages, and do not harm the oil and the wine.”

	7 Ar íre latyanes i cantea *lihta, hlassen i cantea coiteo óma quéta: “Tula!” 8 Ar cennen, ar yé! malwa rocco, ar ye hamme sesse sáme i esse Ñuru, ar Mandos se-hilyane. Ar hére náne tún antana or i canasta cemeno, nahtien andamacilden ar saicelénen ar qualmequámenen ar i hravaninen cemeno.

	7 And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say: “Come!”8 And I saw, and behold! a pale horse, and [he] who sat on it had the name Death, and Mandos [Greek: Hades] followed him. And authority was given them [dual] over one fourth of earth, in order to slay with a long sword and with famine and with deadly disease [qualme-quáme, death-sickness] and with the beasts of earth.

	9 Ar íre latyanes i lempea *lihta, cennen nu i *yangwa fear i nancaron castanen Eruo quetto ar i *vettiéno ya sámelte. 10 Ar yámelte taura ómanen, quétala: “Manen andave, aire ar şanda Hér, ual namuva ar ahtaruva sercelma issen marir cemende?” 11 Ar ninque vaima náne antana ilquenen mici te; ar náne tien quétina i mauyane tien náve sende an şinta lúmesse, tenna i nóte náne quátina yú ion málonúroltaron ar hánoltaron, i nauvaner nahtane ve inte.

9 And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those slain by reason of God’s word and of the witness that they had. 10 And they cried with a mighty voice, saying: “How long, holy and true Sovereign, will you not pass judgment and avenge our blood [issen =] on those who dwell on earth?” 11 And a white robe was given to everyone among them; and [it] was said to them that it was necessary for them to be still for yet a little while, until the number was filled also of their fellow servants and of their brothers, who were going to be slain like themselves.

	12 Ar cennen íre latyanes i enquea *lihta, ar túra *cempalie martane, ar Anar olle more ve *fillanne findiva, ar quanda Işil olle ve serce, 13 ar menelo tinwi lantaner cemenna, ve íre i úmanwe *relyávi lantar *relyávaldallo pálaina taura súrinen.

12 And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and a great earthquake occurred, and the Sun changed [to become] black like a sack-cloth of hair, and the whole Moon became like blood, 13 and the stars of heaven fell to earth, as when the unripe figs fall from a fig-tree being shaken by a mighty wind.

14 Ar menel oante ve *toluparma nála toluina, ar ilya oron ar tol léver yallo anelte. 15 Ar cemeno arani ar i taurar ar i cánor ar i lárear ar i poldar ar ilya mól ar ilya léra quén nurtaner inte i rottossen ar imíca i ondor i orontion. 16 Ar quétalte i orontinnar ar i ondonnar: “Á lanta menna ar áme nurta cendelello yeo hára i mahalmasse ar i rúşello i Euleo, 17 an i túra aure rúşettava utúlie, ar man pole tare?”

14 And heaven passed away like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island moved from where they were. 15 And the kings of earth and the mighty and the commanders and the rich and the strong and every thrall and every free person hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains. 16 And they are saying to the mountains and to the rocks: “Fall upon us and hide us from [the one] who is sitting on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb, 17 for the great day of their wrath has come, and who can stand?”
	
RANTA 7
Epeta cennen vali canta tárala i vincassen canta cemeno, avaleryala i súri canta cemeno, pustien súre hlapuyello cemende hya earesse hya ilya aldasse. 2 Ar cennen hyana vala ortala anarórello, arwa i *lihto Eru Coireáva, ar yámes taura ómanen i valannar canta in náne lávina mala cemen earye, 3 quétala: “Áva mala cemen hya ear hya i aldar, nó *ilihtielme Ainolvo núror timbareltassen.”

CHAPTER 7
Thereafter I saw four angels standing in the four corners of earth, holding back the four winds of earth, to stop wind from blowing on earth or at sea or at every [= any] tree. 2 And I saw another angel rising from the sunrise, having the seal of the Living God, and he cried with a mighty voice to the four angels to whom [it] was permitted to harm [cemen earye =] earth and sea, 3 saying: “Do not harm earth or sea or the trees, before we have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.”

	4 Ar hlassen i nóte i *lihtanaron, canta ar canaquean ar húmi tuxa, *lihtane et ilya nossello Israelindion:
	5 Et nossello Yehúro *lihtanar húmi yunque, et nossello Reuveno húmi yunque, et nossello Áro húmi yunque,
	6 et nossello Ahyero húmi yunque, et nossello Naftalio húmi yunque, et nossello Manasseo húmi yunque,

4 And I heard the number of the sealed ones, four and forty and a hundred thousands [= 144,000], sealed out of every tribe of the Children of Israel:
	5 Out of the tribe of Juda [Jehuda] twelve thousand sealed ones, out of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Gad twelve thousands,
	6 out of the tribe of Asher twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousands;

	7 et nossello Simeondo húmi yunque, et nossello Levio húmi yunque, et nossello Issacáro húmi yunque,
	8 et nossello Sevulundo húmi yunque, et nossello Yósefo húmi yunque, et nossello Venyamíno lihtanar húmi yunque.

	7  out of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Levi twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Issacar twelve thousands,
	8 out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand sealed ones.

	9 Apa si cennen, ar yé! haura rimbe ya *úquen ista onote, et ilye nórellon ar nossellon ar liellon ar lambellon, tárala epe i mahalma ar epe i Eule, vaine ninqui vaimassen; ar enger olvar *nindornion máltassen. 10 Ar yámelte taura ómanen, quétala: “Rehtie tule Ainolvallo, ye hára i mahalmasse, ar i Eulello.”

	9 After this I saw, and behold! a huge crowd that nobody knows how to count, out of all nations [or, lands] and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clad in white robes; and there were branches of palms in their hands. 10 And they cried with a mighty voice, saying: “Salvation comes from our God, who is sitting on the throne, and from the Lamb.”

	11 Ar ilye i vali tarner *os i mahalma ar i amyárar ar i coiti canta, ar lantanelte cendeleltanna epe i mahalma ar *tyerner Eru, 12 quétala: “Násie! I aistie ar i alcar ar i sailie ar i hantale ar i *laitie ar i túre na Ainolvan, tennoio ar oi! Násie!”

	11 And all the angels stood around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell upon their face before the throne and worshiped God, 12 saying: “Amen! The blessing and the glory and the wisdom and the thanksgiving and the honor and the power be to our God, forever and ever! Amen!”

	13 Tá quén i amyáraron carampe ninna, quétala: “Man nar queni sine i nar vaine mi ninqui vaimar, ar mallo utúlielte?” 14 Quenten senna: “Herunya, elye ista!” Ar nyarnes nin: “Queni sine nar i túlar et i túra şangiello, ar opoitielte vaimaltar ar ininquitáyer tai sercesse i Euleo. 15 Etta ealte epe i mahalma Eruva, ar *veuyaltes auresse yo lómisse cordaryasse, ar ye hára i mahalmasse panyuva *lancoarya or te. 16 Ualte nauva maite hya soice ata; Anar ua petuva te, hya urtala úre. 17 An i Eule endesse i mahalmo nauva mavarelta, ar te-tulyuvas ehtelennar coirea nenwa, ar Eru mapuva oa ilya nie hendultalto.”

	13 Then one of the elders spoke to me, saying: “Who are these people that are clad in white robes, and  where have they come from?” 14 I said to him: “My lord, you know!” And he told me: “These people are [the ones] who come out of the great tribulation, and they have cleansed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 15 Therefore they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day and night in his temple, and [he] who is sitting on the throne shall place his tent over them. 16 They shall not be hungry or thirsty again; the sun shall not strike them, or [any] burning heat. 17 For the Lamb in midst of the throne shall be their shepherd, and he shall lead them to springs of living water, and God shall take away every tear from their eyes.”

RANTA 8
Íre i Eule latyane i otsea *lihta enge quilde menelde *os perta lúmeo. 2 Tá cennen i vali otso i tarir epe Eru, ar hyólar otso náner tien antane. 3 Ar hyana vala, ye sáme *nisquema maltava, túle ar tarne ara i *yangwa, ar náne sen antana hoa lesta *nisqueo, carien ostime as i hyamier ilye i airion, i *yangwasse maltava epe i mahalma. 4 Ar ho i valo má, epe Eru, i usque i *nisqueo oronte as i hyamier i airion. 5 Tá i vala nampe i *nisquema ar sa-quante nárenen i *yangwallo. Ar sa-hantes cemenna; ar enger hundiéli ar ómali ar ítali ar palie cemeno.

CHAPTER 8
When the Lamb opened the seventh seal there was silence in heaven around half of an hour. 2 Then I saw the seven angels that stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. 3 And another angel, who had an incense vessel of gold, came and stood beside the altar, and a great measure of incense was given to him, to make a blend with the prayers of all the holy ones, on the altar of gold before the throne. 4 And from the angel’s hand, before God, the smoke from the incense rose with the prayers of the holy ones. 5 Then the angel took the incense vessel and filled it with fire from the altar. And he threw it upon earth; and there were thunders and voices and flashes and a shaking of the earth.

	6 Sí i vali otso i sámer i hyólar otso manwaner lamyáven tai.
	7 I minya vala lamyane hyólarya, ar hilyaner *helexe ar ruive ostimesse as serce, ar anes hátina cemenna; ar nelesta cemeno náne urtana, ar nelesta i aldaron náner urtane, ar ilya laica salque náne urtana.

	6 Now the seven angels that had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
	7 The first angel sounded his trumpet, and there followed hail and fire in a blend with blood, and it was hurled to earth; and a third of earth was burnt, and a third of the trees were burned, and all green grass was burnt.
	
8 I attea vala lamyane hyólarya, ar nat ve hoa oron, uryala narnen, náne hátina mir ear; 9 ar nelesta earo olle serce, nelesta i onnaron earesse qualler, i sámer coivie; ar nelesta i ciryaron náner nancarne.
10 I neldea vala lamyane hyólarya, ar hoa tinwe lantane menello, uryala ve calma, ar lantanes i nelestanna i sírion ar ehteleron nenwa. 11 I tinweo esse *Sárálaique ná. Nelesta i nenion olle *sáralaique, ar rimbe ennoli qualler i nennen, an anes carna sára.

8 The second angel sounded his trumpet, and a thing like a great mountain, burning with fire, was thrown into [the] sea; 9 and a third of [the] sea became blood, a third part of the creatures in [the] sea died, the [ones] that had life; and a third of the ships were destroyed [nancarne = “undone”].
10 The third angel sounded his trumpet, and a huge star fell from heaven, burning like a lamp, and it fell on the third part of the rivers and springs of water. 11 The star’s name is Wormwood. A third part of the waters became wormwood, and many people died of the water, for it was made bitter.

12 I cantea vala lamyane hyólarya, ar nelesta Anaro náne pétina, ar nelesta Işilo, ar nelesta i tinwion. Sie nelesta calalto olle mornie; lá enge cala nelestasse i aureo, hya nelestasse i lómio.
13 Ar cennen, ar hlassen şoron yáma taura ómanen lan vílanes endesse menelo: “Ai, ai, ai in marir cemende, i lemyala hyólalammainen ho i vali nelde i sí lamyuvar hyólalta!”

12 The fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third part of [the] Sun was smitten [pétina = struck], and a third of [the] Moon, and a third of the stars. Thus a third of their light became darkness; [there] was no light for a third of the day, or for a third of the night.
13 And I saw, and I heard an eagle cry with a mighty voice while it was flying in the midst of heaven: “Woe, woe, woe for those who dwell on earth, because of [-nen] the remaining trumpet-sounds from the three angels that will now sound their trumpet!”

RANTA 9
Ar i lempea vala lamyane hyólarya, ar cennen tinwe lantienwa menello cemenna, ar náne sen antana i *latil i sapto i undumeo. 2 Latyanes i sapta i undumeo, ar usque oronte ve hoa urnallo, ar Anar ar i vilya oller morne i usquenen i saptallo. 3 Ar et i usquello túler *salquecápoli cemenna, ar náne ten antana hére ve i hére i *nastaroron cemende.

CHAPTER 9
And the fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a star fallen from heaven to earth, and the key to the pit of the abyss was given to him. 2 He opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke rose as from a huge oven, and [the] sun and the air became dark by the smoke from the pit. 3 And out of the smoke came grasshoppers upon earth, and authority [hére, lordship] like the authority of the scorpions on earth was given to them.

4 Náne tien quétina i ávalte malumne cemeno salque hya ilya laica olva hya erya alda, mal rie i queni lá arwe i *lihto Eruva timbareltasse. 5 Náne tien antana te-ñwalie astassen lempe, mal lá te-nahtie, ar ñwalmelta náne ve ñwalme *nastaro, íre nastas quén. 5 Ar mí ente rí queni cestuvar ñuru, mal laume hiruvalte sa; milyuvalte quale, mal ñuru uşuva tello.

4 [It] was said to them that they were not to harm the grass of earth or every [= any] green plant or a single tree, but only the people not having the seal of God on their forehead. 5 [It] was given to them to torment them for five months, but not to kill them, and their torment was like the torment of a scorpion, when it stings somebody. 5 And in those days people shall seek death, but they shall by no means find it; they shall long to die, but death shall escape from them.

	7 Ilce i *salquecáporon náne ve roccor manwane ohtan; ar cariltasse enger yar nemne ve ríer maltava; cendelelta náne ve atanion cendele, 8 ar sámelte findele ve nission findele, ar nelciltar náner ve rávion nelci; 9 sámelte ambassi ve angaine ambassi, ar i lamma rámaltaron náne ve i lamma rimbe norolleron arwe roccoron i nórar ohtanna. 10 Samilte pimpe arwe nasseo ve *nastaror samir, ar ea pimpeltasse túrelta malien queni astassen lempe. 11 Ve aran te-turila ea tien i undumeo vala; esserya Heveryasse Avandon ná, ar Hellenyasse samis i esse Apollion.

	7 The appearance of the grasshoppers was like horses prepared for war; and on their head were [things] that looked like crowns of gold; their face was like men’s face, 8 and they had hair like women’s hair, and their teeth were like lions’ teeth; 9 they had breast-plates like breast-plates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the sound of many chariots with horses that are running to war. 10 They had a tail with a sting like scorpions have, and their power to harm people for five months is in their tails. 11 As a king ruling them [there] is to them the angel of the abyss; his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he has the name Apollyon.

12 I minya naice avánie. Yé! tuluvat an naice atta apa si.
13 I enquea vala lamyane hyólarya, ar hlassen óma i rassellon canta i *yangwasse maltava epe Eru 14 quéta i enquea valanna, isse ye sáme i hyóla: “Á lerya i vali canta i nar nútine ara i hoa síre Perat!” 15 Ar i vali canta náner leryane, i náner manwane i lúmen, i auren, i astan ar i loan, nahtien nelesta Atanion.

	12 The first woe has passed. Behold! [there] will come two woes more after this.
	13 The sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard a voice from the four horns on the altar of gold before God 14 say to the sixth angel, he who had the trumpet: “Release the four angels that are bound by the great river Euphrates!” 15 And the four angels were released, who were prepared for the hour, for the day, for the month and for the year, to kill one third of Men.

16 I nóte i roquenion hosseltasse náne húmi *yúquean lúr húmi quean; hlassen nótelta. 17 Ar sie yentenye i roccor ar i hammer tesse mí maur: i roqueni coller ambassi arwe i quileo náreo ar lúleo ar *ussardo, ar i cas i roccoiva náne ve cas rávion, ar ruine ar usque ar *ussar lender et antoltallo. 18 Nelde sine ungwalínen nelesta Atanion náne nahtana, i nárenen ar i usquenen ar i *ussardenen yar lender et antoltallo. 19 An i túre i roccoron ea antoltasse ar pimpeltasse; pimpelta náne ve leuca, arwe caro, ar sanen harnalte.

16 The number of the riders in their army was twenty thousands [lúr =] times ten thousand; I heard their number. 17 And so I beheld the horses and those who sat on them in the vision: the riders bore breastplates with the colour of fire and of sapphire and of sulphur, and the head of the horses was like the head of lions, and fire and smoke and sulphur went out of their mouth. 18 By these three plagues one third of Men was [/were] slain, by the fire and by the smoke and by the sulphur that went out of their mouth. 19 For the power of the horses is in their mouth and in their tail; their tail was like a serpent, having a head, and by means of it they wound [people].

20 I lemyala ranta Atanion, i úner nahtane sine ungwalínen, uar hirne inwis pa i cardar máltato hya pustane *tyere raucor ar cordoni maltava ar telpeva ar urusteva ar ondova ar toava, yar uar pole cene hya hlare hya vanta; 21 ente, ualte hirne inwis pa nahtieltar hya ñólelta hya *hrupuhtalelta hya pilweltar.
	
	20 The remaining part of Men, who were not killed by these plagues, did not find repentance concerning the deeds of their hands [dual] or cease to worship demons and idols of gold and of silver and of copper and of stone and of wood, that cannot see or hear or walk; 21 furthermore; they did not find repentance concerning their murders or their sorcery or their fornication or their thefts.

RANTA 10
Ar cennen hyana polda vala túla undu menello, vaina fanyasse ar arwa helyanweo or carya, ar cendelerya náne ve Anar, ar telcoryat ve tarmar náreva. 2 Sámes pitya pantana parma. Ar panyanes forya talya earesse ar i hyarya noresse, 3 ar yámes taura ómanen, ve íre rá ná rávea. Ar íre yámes, i hundier otso quenter vére ómaltainen.
4 Apa i hundier otso quenter, inye tecumne, mal hlassen óma menello ya quente: “Á *lihta yar i hundier otso equétier ar áva tece tail!”

CHAPTER 10
And I saw another strong angel come down from heaven, clad in a cloud and having a rainbow over his head, and his face is like [the] Sun, and his feet [or, legs] like pillars of fire. 2 He had a small, opened book. And he placed his right foot on [the] sea and the left on [the] land, 3 and he cried [out] with a mighty voice, as when a lion is roaring. And when he cried [out], the seven thunders spoke with their own voices.
4 After the seven thunders spoke, I was going to write, but I heard a voice from heaven that said: “Seal up [the things] which the seven thunders have said and do not write them!”

5 Ar i vala ya cennen tárala earesse ar noresse ortane márya menelenna ar antane vandarya yenen coita tennoio ar oi, ye ontane menel ar ya ea sasse, ar cemen ar ya ea sasse, ar ear ar ya ea sasse: “I lúme avánie! 7 Mal mí rí yassen i otsea vala nauva hláraina – íre lamyuvas hyólarya – tá Eruo fóle nauva telyaina, ve i evandilyon ya antanes núroryain, i Erutercánor.”

5 And the angel that I saw standing on sea and land raised his hand to heaven and gave his oath by [the one] who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and [that] which is in it, and earth and [that] which is in it, and [the] sea and [that] which is in it: “The time has passed! [or: Time is out!] 7 But in the days [rí pl. of ré] in which the seventh angel shall be heard – when he shall sound his trumpet – then God’s mystery shall be completed, according to the gospel that he gave to his servants, the prophets.”

8 Ar i óma ya hlassen menello quente ninna ata, quétala: “Á lelya, á mapa i parma ya ná pantana ho i má i valo ye tára earesse ar noresse.” 9 Ar lenden i valanna ar quente senna i nin-antauvanes i pitya parma; ar quentes ninna: “Ása mapa ar mata; nauvas sára cumbalyan, mal lisse ve melu sangolyasse.” 10 Ar nampen i pitya parma ho i valo má ar sa-mante; anes lisse ve melu sangonyasse, mal apa mantenyes cumbanya olle sára. 11 Ar náne quétina ninna: “Mauya lyen ata quete ve Erutercáno, pa lieli ar nóreli ar lambeli, ar rimbe aralli.”

8 And the voice that I heard from heaven spoke to me again, saying: “Go, and take the book that is opened from the hand of the angel who is standing on sea and land.” 9 And I went to the angel and said to him that he was to give me the little book; and he said to me: “Take it and eat [it]; it shall be bitter to your belly, but sweet as honey in your mouth.” 10 And I took the little book from the angel’s hand and ate it; it was sweet as honey in my mouth, but after I ate it my belly became bitter. 11 And [it] was said to me: “You must again speak like a prophet, about peoples and nations and tongues, and many kings.”[Mauya lyen = “(it) compels for you” = you must. Aralli, partitive plural of aran “king”.]

RANTA 11
Ar sirpe ve vandil náne nin antana, ar mo quente: “Á orta ar á *lesta i corda Eruva ar i *yangwa ar i *tyerir sasse, 2 mal á hehta i cordo etya paca ar ávasa *lesta, an nas antana nórin, ar *vattuvalte i aire ostonna astassen atta ar *canaquean. 3 Ar lavuvan *vettonya attan quete ve Erutercánor ter rí enenquean ar tuxar yunque, vaine mi lanne findiva.” 4 Tú nát i *milpialda atta ar i calmatarma atta yar tarir epe i Heru cemeno.

CHAPTER 11
And a rod like a staff was given to me, and one said: “Rise and measure the temple of God and the altar and those who worship in it, 2 but leave out the temple’s outer courtyard and do not measure it, for it is given to [the] nations [i.e. the Gentiles], and they shall trample upon the holy city for two and forty months. 3 And I shall let my two witnesses speak as prophets for [ter = through] sixty and twelve hundred days, clad in cloth of hair. 4 They [tú, dual] are [nát, dual] the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of earth.

5 Qui aiquen mere mala tú, nár mene et antottallo ar ammate ñottottar, ar qui aiquen mere mala tú, nauvas nahtana sie. 6 Tú samit hére holtien menel, pustien ulo lantiello mí rí yar quétatte ve Erutercánor, ar samitte hére or i neni, vistáven tai mir serce ar petien cemen ilya ungwalénen, quiquie meritte.

5 If anyone wants to harm them, fire goes out of their mouth and devours their enemies, and if anyone wants to harm them, he shall be slain thus. 6 They [tú, dual] have the authority to shut up heaven, to stop rain from falling in the days that they are speaking as prophets, and they have authority over the waters, in order to turn [lit. change] them into blood and to strike earth with every plague, whenever they wish. [Notice the endings -tte and *-tta for dual “they” and their”.]

7 Ar íre etelyaniette *vettietta, i hravan ye orya i undumello ohtacaruva túna, ar turúvas tu ar nahtuva tu. 8 Ar loicottat caituvat i palla mallesse i hoa ostosse ya mi lé i faireo ná estaina Sorom ar Mirrandor, yasse yú Herutta tarwestana né. 9 Ennoli i lieron ar nossion ar lambion ar nórion yétuvar loicottat ter rí nelde ar perta, ar ualte lave i loicottat nát panyane sapsasse. 10 Ar i marir cemende samir alasse pa tú ar nar valime, ar mentauvalte annar quén i exenna, an Erutercáno atta sine ñwalyanet i marir cemende.

7 And when they have completed their witnessing, the beast that rises from the abyss will make war upon them [túna, dual], and it will conquer them and slay them. 8 And their corpses [loicottat, dual] shall lie in the broad street in the huge city that in the manner of spirit is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified. 9 Persons of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations shall look upon their corpses for three and a half days, and they do not permit that their corpses are put in a grave. 10 And those who dwell on earth have joy concerning them and are happy, and they shall send gifts to one another, for these two prophets tormented those who dwell on earth.

11 Mal apa i rí nelde ar perta coiviefaire Erullo túle minna tu, ar orontette taluttatse, ar túra caure lantane innar yenter tu. 12 Ar hlassette taura óma et menello quéta túna: “Tula ama sir!” Ar lendette mir menel i fanyasse, ar cotumottar cenner tu. 13 Ar lúme yanasse enge túra *cempalie, ar quaista i osto atalante, ar queni húmi otso náner nahtane i *cempaliénen, ar i lemner náner ruhtane ar antaner alcar Erun menelo.

But after the three and a half days life-spirit from God came into them, and they rose on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who looked at them. 12 And they heard a mighty voice out of heaven say to them: “Come up here!” And they went into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies saw them. 13 And at that time [there] was a great earthquake, and one tenth of the city collapsed, and seven thousand people were killed by the earthquake, and [those] who remained were terrified and gave glory to [the] God of heaven.

14 I attea naice avánie. Yé! i neldea naice tuluva ron.
15 Ar i otsea vala lamyane hyólarya. Ar taure ómali náner hláraine menelde, quétala: “I aranie i mardo olólie Herulvo ar Hristoryo, ar turuvas tennoio ar oi.”

14 The second woe has passed. Behold! the third woe shall come soon.
15 And the seventh angel sounded his trumpet. And mighty voices were being heard in heaven, saying: “The kingdom of the world has become our Lord’s and his Christ’s, and he will rule forever and ever.”

16 Ar i amyárar canta ar *yúquean i hammer epe Eru mahalmaltassen lantaner cendeleltannar ar *tyerner Eru, 17 quétala: “Hantalme lyen, Héru Eru, i Iluvala, ye ea ar ye enge, an amápiel túra túrelya ar ture ve aran. 18 Mal nóri náner rúşie, ar véra rúşelya túle, ar i lúme namien i qualinar ar antáven *paityale núrolyain i Erutercánor, ar i airin ar in rucir esselyallo, i pityain yo i túrain, ar nancarien i nancarir cemen.”

16 And the four and twenty elders that sat before God on their thrones fell on their faces and worshipped God, 17 saying: “We thank you, Lord God, the Almighty, who is and who was, for you have taken your great power and rule as king. 18 But [the] nations were wrathful, and your own wrath came, and the time for judging the dead and for giving reward to your servants the prophets, and to the holy ones and to those who fear your name, to the small and the great, and for destroying [those] who destroy earth. [Nancar- “undo”, here used = “destroy”.]

19 Ar i corda Eruva ya ea menelde náne latyana, ar i colca véreryo náne cénaina cordaryasse. Ar enger ítali ar ómali ar hundiéli ar *cempalie ar túra *helexe.

19 And God’s temple that is in heaven was opened, and the ark [colca “box”] of his covenant was being seen in his temple. And [there] were flashes and voices and thunders and an earthquake and great hail.

RANTA 12
Ar túra tanwa náne cénaina menelde, nís vaina Anaresse, ar Işil enge nu talyat, ar caryasse enge ríe tinwiva yunque. 2 Anes lunga hínanen, ar yamas naiceryassen ar ñwalmeryasse colien.
	3 Ar hyana tanwa náne cénina menelde, ar yé! hoa narwa hlóce, arwa carion otso ar rassion quean, ar caryassen samis *şarnuntar otso. 4 Pimperya tuce nelesta i tinwion menelo, ar hantes tai undu cemenna. Ar i hlóce tarne epe i nís ye náne manwa colien, ammatieryan hínarya íre hé columne.

CHAPTER 12
And a great sign was being seen in heaven, a woman clad in [the] Sun, and [the] Moon was under her feet, and on her head was a crown of twelve stars. 2 She was heavy with child, and she cries [out] in her pains and in her agony to bear [/give birth].
	3 And another sign was seen in heaven, and behold! a huge fiery-red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on its heads it has seven diadems. 4 Its tail drags one third of the stars of heaven, and it throws them down upon earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was ready to bear [a child], for it to devour her child when she would bear [it].

	5 Ar colles yondo, seldo, ye turuva ilye nóri angaina vandilden. Ar hínarya náne mapana oa Erunna ar mahalmaryanna. 6 Ar i nís úşe mir i ravanda, yasse samis nóme manwana lo Eru, antáveltan sen tasse maureryar ter rí *enenquean ar tuxar yunque.

	5 And she bore a son, a boy, who shall rule all nations with an iron rod. And her child was seized away to God and to his throne. 6 And the woman escaped into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, for them to give her her needs there for sixty and twelve hundred [= 1260] days.

	7 Ar ohta martane menelde: Mícael ar valaryar mahtaner i hlócenna, ar i hlóce ar valaryar mahtaner, 8 mal uas turune, ar tien nóme úne ambe híraina menelde. 9 Ar i túra hlóce náne hátina undu, i enwina leuca, ye ná estaina i Arauco ar Sátan, ye tyare quanda Ambar ranya – anes hátina undu cemenna, ar valaryar náner hátine undu óse.

7 And a war occurred in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and its angels fought, 8 but he did not conquer, and for them no place was found in heaven anymore [lit: and for them place was not more being found in heaven]. 9 And the great dragon was thrown down, the ancient serpent, who is called the Devil and Satan, who causes [the] entire world to err – he was thrown down upon earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.

10 Ar hlassen taura óma menello quéta: “Sí utúlier i rehtie ar i túre ar i aranie Ainolvo ar i hére Hristoryo, an i *ulquéto hánolvaron hátina undu ná, ye te quente ulco ana te mi aure yo lóme epe Ainolva! 11 Ar turuneltes i Euleo sercenen ar *vettielto quettanen, ar coivieltar úner tien ta melde i avanelte vele qualme. 12 Etta na valime, a menel ar i marir sasse! Ai cemenen ar earen! An i Arauco utúlie undu lenta, arwa túra rúşeo, istala i lúmerya şinta ná.”

10 And I heard a mighty voice from heaven say: “Now the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the lordship of his Christ have come, for the accuser of our brothers is thrown down, who spoke evil against them day and night before our God! 11 And they conquered him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their witness, and their lives were not to them so dear that they refused to see [or, meet] death. 12 Therefore be happy, o heaven and [those] who dwell in it! Alas for earth and sea! For the Devil has come down to you [lenta, dual allative], having great wrath, knowing that his time is short.”

	13 Ar íre i hlóce cenne i anes hátina undu cemenna, roitanes i nís ye colde i seldo. 14 Mal rámat i túra şorno nánet antane i nissen, polieryan vile mir i ravanda nómeryanna; tasse camis maureryar ter lúme ar lúmeli ar perta lúmeo, haira i leuco cendelello.

	13 And when the dragon saw that it was thrown down upon earth, it pursued the woman who bore the boy. 14 But the two wings [rámat, dual] of the great eagle were [nánet, dual] given to the woman, for her to be able to fly into the wilderness to her place; there she receives her needs for a time and times and half of a time, far from the face of the serpent.

	15 Ar i leuca mentane nén ve síre antoryallo apa i nís, se-colien oa i sírenen. 16 Mal cemen manyane i nís, ar cemen latyane antorya ar *hlunce i síre ya quamne i hlóce antoryallo. 17 Ar i hlóce náne rúşea i nissenna, ar lende oa ohtacarien innar lemner erderyo, i hepir i axani Eruo ar samir i *vettie pa Yésus.    

	15 And the serpent sent water like a river from its mouth after the woman, to carry her away by [means of] the river. 16 But earth helped the woman, and earth opened its mouth and swallowed the river that the dragon vomited from its mouth. 17 And the dragon was wroth with [-nna, “ against”] the woman, and went away to make war on [those] who remained of her seed, [the ones] who keep the commandments of God and have the witness about Jesus.

RANTA 13
Ar tarnes i litsesse ara ear.
	Ar cennen hravan ortala et earello, arwa rassion quean ar carion otso, ar rasseryassen samis *şarnuntar quean, ar cariryassen ear esseli yaiweo Eruva. 2 Ar i hravan ye cennen náne ve *picara, mal taliryar náner ve morco tali, ar antorya náne ve rávo anto. Ar i hlóce antane sen túrerya ar mahalmarya ar túra hére.

CHAPTER 13
And it stood on the sand by [the] sea.
	And I saw a beast rising out of [the] sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and on its horns it has ten diadems, and on its heads [there] are names of mockery of God. 2 And the beast that I saw was like a leopard, but its feet were like a bear’s feet, and its mouth was like a lion’s mouth. And the dragon gave it its power and its throne and great authority [hére, lordship].

3 I nemesta ero caryaron náne ve qui anes harna qualmen, mal qualmeharwerya náne nestaina, ar i quanda cemen hilyane i hravan elmendasse. 4 Ar *tyernelte i hlóce pan antanes i hére i hravanen, ar *tyernelte i hravan quétala: “Man ve i hravan ná, ar man pole mahta senna?” 5 Ar náne sen antana anto quétala túre nati ar yaiwi Erunna, ar camnes hére carien ya meris astain atta ar *canaquean. 6 Ar latyanes antorya yaiwessen Erunna, quetien yaiwi esseryanna ar vehteryanna, ar innar marir menelde. 7 Ar náne sen antana care ohta i airinnar ar turue te, ar camnes hére or ilya nosse ar lie ar lambe ar nóre. 8 Ar ilye i marir cemende se-*tyeruvar, té ion essi uar técine Parmasse Coiviéva i Euleva ye náne nanca i tulciello i mardeva.

3 The appearance of one of its heads was as if it was wounded to death, but its death-wound was healed, and the entire earth followed the beast in wonder. 4 And they worshiped the dragon since it gave the authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast saying: “Who is like the beast, and who can fight against it?” 5 And [there] was given to it a mouth speaking great things and mockeries against God, and it received authority to do what it wants for two and forty months. 6 And it opened its mouth in mockeries against God, to speak mockeries against his name and against his abode, and of [those] who dwell in heaven. 7 And [there] was given to it to make war on the holy ones and to conquer them, and it received authority over every tribe and people and tongue and nation. 8 And all [those] who dwell on earth will worship it, they whose names are not written in the Book of Live of the Lamb who was killed from the founding of the world.

9 Aiquen arwa hlaro, nai hlaruvas! 10 Qui quén mandon ná, mir mando menis. Qui quén nahtuva macilden, nauvas nanca macilden. Sís ea maure voronweva ar saviéva i airion.
11 Ar cennen hyana hravan, ye oronte et cemello, ar sámes rasset ve eule, mal carampes ve hlóce. 12 Mahtas i quanda hére i minya hravano epe henduryat. Tyaris cemen ar i marir sasse *tyere i minya hravan, yeo qualmeharwe náne nestana. 13 Ar caris túre tanwar; yando nár tyaris lanta undu et menello cemenna epe hendu atanion.

9 Anyone having an ear, may he hear! 10 If a person is for prison, into prison he goes. If a person will kill by sword, he will be killed by sword [macil-nen > macilden]. Here [there] is need of faithfulness and of [the] faith of the holy ones.
11 And I saw another beast, that rose out of earth, and it had two horns [rasset, dual] like a lamb, but it spoke as a dragon. 12 It wields [or, uses] the entire authority of the first beast before its eyes. It causes earth and [those] who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose death-wound was healed. 13 And it does great signs; also [/even] fire it causes to fall down out of heaven to earth before [the] eyes of men.

14 Ar tyaris vare i marir cemende, i tanwainen yar nar sen lávina care epe hendu i hravano. Quetis innar marir cemende i caruvalte emma i hravano, ye camne i nahte macilo ar nanwenne coivienna. 15 Ente, náne sen lávina anta şúle i hravano emman, tyárala i hravano emma carpa, ar yú tyárala náve nahtane illi i váquenter *tyere i hravano emma.

14 And it causes to err [those] who dwell on earth, by the signs that it is allowed to do before the eyes of the beast. It says to [those] who dwell on earth that they are to make [an] image of the beast, who received the wound of a sword and came back to life. 15 Furthermore, [it] was granted to it to give breath to the beast’s image, causing the beast's image to talk, and also causing to be slain all who refused to worship the beast's image.

16 Ar tyaris illi, i pityar ar i túrar, i lárear ar i penyar, ar i lérar ar i móli, came tehta formaltasse hya timbareltasse, 17 ar *úquen náne lávina manca hya vace hequa quén arwa i tehto – i hravano esse hya i nóte esseryo. 18 Sís ea maure sailiéva: Lava i handan note i hravano nóte, an nás atano nóte, ar nóterya ná enque ar *enenquean ar tuxar enque.

	16 And it causes all, the small and the great, the rich and the poor, and the free and the thralls, to receive a mark on their right hand or on their forehead, 17 and nobody was allowed to trade or sell except a person having the mark – the beast’s name or the number of its name. 18 Here [there] is need of wisdom: Let the intelligent one calculate the beast’s number, for it is a man’s number, and its name is six and sixty and six hundreds [= 666].

RANTA 14
Ar cennen, ar yé! i Eule tárane to Oron Síon, ar as sé húmi canta *canaquean ar tuxa i samir esserya ar i esse Ataryo técine timbareltasse. 2 Ar hlassen lamma et menello, ve i lamma rimbe nenion ar ve i lamma túra hundiéno; ar i lamma ya hlassen náne ve ñandaror i tyalir ñandeltainen. 3 Ar lirilte vinya líre epe i mahalma ar epe i coiti canta ar i amyárar, ar ua ence aiquenen pare líre tana hequa i húmi canta *canaquean ar tuxa, i nar mancane cemello. 4 Té nar i uar avahtie inte nissínen, an nalte vendi. Té nar i hilyar i Eule ilya nómenna ya lelyas. Anelte mancane ho mici Atani ve minye yávi Erun ar i Eulen, 5 ar huru úne hírina antoltasse; nalte pen mordo.

CHAPTER 14
And I saw, and behold! the Lamb was standing on Mount Sion, and with it four and forty and a hundred thousands [= 144,000] that have his name and the name of his Father written on their forehead. 2 And I heard a sound out of heaven, like the sound of many waters and like the sound of great thunder; and the sound that I heard was like harpers that play on their harps. 3 And they sing a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders, and it was not possible for anyone to learn that song except the four and forty and hundred thousands, that are bought [mancaine, “traded”] from earth. 4 They are [the ones] that have not defiled themselves with women, for they are virgins. They are [the ones] that follow the Lamb every place [/wherever] it goes. They are bought [mancaine] from among Men as first fruits for God and for the Lamb, 5 and lie was not found in their mouth; they are without spot.

	6 Ar cennen hyana vala víla endesse menelo, arwa oira evandilyono, sa-carieryan sinwa in marir cemende, ar ilya nóren ar nossen ar lamben ar lien, 7 quétala taura ómanen: “Ruca Erullo ar ásen anta alcar, an i lúme námieryo utúlie, ar *tyera ye carne menel cemenye ar ear ar ehteler nenwa.”
	8 Ar exe, attea vala, hilyane quétala: “Alanties! Alantie Vável Túra, ye tyarne ilye nóri suce i limpeo i rúşeva *hrupuhtaleryo!”

6 And I saw another angel fly in [the] midst of heaven, having had an eternal gospel, for him to make it known to [those] who dwell on earth, and to every nation and tribe and tongue and people, 7 saying with a mighty voice: “Fear God and give him glory, for the hour of his judgment has come, and worship [him] who made heaven and earth and sea and [the] springs of water.”
8 And another, a second angel, followed saying: “She has fallen! Babylon [Vável = Babel] the Great has fallen, who caused all nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication!”

	9 Ar hyana vala, neldea, hilyane tu, quétala taura ómanen: “Qui aiquen *tyere i hravan ar emmarya, ar came i tehta timbareryasse hya máryasse, 10 issue yú sucuva i limpeo i ormeva Eruo ya ná ulyaina poica mir i yulma rúşeryava, ar nauvas ñwalyaina nárenen ar *ussardenen epe i airi vali ar epe i Eule. 11 Ar i usque ñwalmelto orta ama tennoio ar oi, ar auresse yo lómisse ualte same sére, i *tyerir i hravan ar emmarya, ar aiquen ye came i tehta esseryo. 12 Sís ea maure i voronwiéva i airion, i hepir i axani Eruo ar i savie Yésuo.”

	9 And another angel, a third, followed them, saying in a mighty voice: “If anyone worships the beast and its image, and receives the mark on his forehead or on his hand, 10 he shall also drink from the vine of the anger of God that is being poured [out] pure into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented by fire and sulfur before the holy angels and before the Lamb. 11 And the smoke of their torment rises up forever and ever, and day and night they do not have rest, those who worship the beast and its image, and anyone who receives the mark of its name. 12 Here [there] is need of the faithfulness of the holy ones, those who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.”

	13 Ar hlassen óma et menello quéta: “Teca: Valime nar i qualinar i qualir i Herusse, ho sí. Ná, i Faire quete, lava tien sere molieltallon, an cardaltar te-hilyar.”
	14 Ar cennen, ar yé! fána fanya, ar i fanyasse quén ve atanyondo hamme, sámala ríe maltava caryasse ar aica circa máryasse.
	15 Ar hyana vala etelende i cordallo, yámala taura ómanen yenna hamme i fanyasse: “Á menta circalya ar *cirihta, an i lúme yáviéno utúlie, ar cemeno yávie manwa ná.” 16 Ar ye hamme i fanyasse mentane circarya olla cemen, ar cemen náne *cirihtana.

	13 And I heard a voice from heaven say: “Write: Happy are the dead who die in the Lord, from now [on]. Yes, the Spirit says, let them rest from their labors, for their deeds follow them.”
	14 And I saw, and behold: a white cloud, and on the cloud a person like a son of man sat, having a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
	15 And another angel went forth from the temple, crying with a mighty voice to [him] who sat on the cloud: “Put your sickle in [lit. “send your sickle”, as in the Greek] and reap, for the time of harvest has come, and the harvest of earth is ripe.” 16 And [he] who sat on the cloud sent his sickle over the earth, and [the] earth was reaped.

	17 Ar hyana vala etelende i cordallo ya ea menelde, yú isse arwa aica circo.
	18 Ar hyana vala etelende i *yangwallo, ye sáme hére or i náre. Ar yámes taura ómanen yenna sáme i aica circa, quétala: “Á menta aica circalya ar á comya i loxi liantasseo cemeno, an *tiumaryar nar manwe.” 19 Ar i vala mahtane circarya cemende ar comyane i yáve liantasseo cemeno, ar sa-hante mir i hoa *limpevorma rúşeva Eruo. 20 Ettesse i osto i *limpevorma náne *vattana, ar serce ulle i *limpevormallo ve tárave ve i *antolattar i roccoron, *restandier tuxar enque ar húme oa sallo.

	17 And another angel went forth from the temple that is in heaven, he too having a sharp sickle.
	18 And another angel went forth from the altar, [he] who had authority over the fire. And he cried with a mighty voice to [him] who had the sharp sickle, saying: “Put in [lit. “send”] your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the wine of earth, for its grapes are ripe.” 19 And the angel used [lit. handled] his sickle on earth and gathered the fruit of the vine of earth, and threw it into the great wine-press of the wrath of God. 20 Outside of the city the wine-press was trodden, and blood poured from the wine-press as high as the bridles of the horses, six hundred and a thousand [= 1,600] furlongs away from it.

RANTA 15  
Ar cennen hyana tanwa menelde, túra ar *elmendea: vali otso arwe ungwaleron otso, i métimar, an tainen Eruo orme ná telyana.
	2 Ar cennen nat ve ailin calcava, ostimesse as náre, ar i turunelyaner i hravan ar emmarya ar esseryo nóte tarner ara i ailin calcava, arwe ñandélion Eruva. 3 Ar lindalte i líre Móseo, Eruo núro, ar i líre i Euleo, quétala: “Túre ar *elmendie nar cardalyar, Héru Eru, i Iluvala. Faile ar şande nar tielyar, Aran nórion. 4 Man ua rucuva lyello, a Héru, ar antauva alcar esselyan? An elye erinqua aire ná. An ilye nóri tuluvar ar *tyeruvar epe lye, an faile námielyar anaier apantane.”

CHAPTER 15
And I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful: seven angels having seven plagues, the last ones, for by [means of] them God’s anger is finished.
	2 And I saw a thing like a lake of glass, in a blend with fire, and [those] who had conquered the beast and its image and the number of its name stood next to the lake of glass, having harps of God. 3 And they sing the song of Moses, God’s servant, and the song of the Lamb, saying: “Great and wonderful are your works [or, deeds], Lord God, the Almighty. Just and true are your ways, King of [the] nations. 4 Who shall not fear you, o Lord, and give glory to your name? For you alone are holy. For all nations shall come and worship before you, for your righteous judgments have been revealed.”

	5 Ar apa nati sine cennen, ar i yána i *Lancavo *Vettiéva náne latyana menelde, 6 ar i vali otso arwe i ungwaleron otso etelender i yánallo, vaine poica, calima *páşesse ar nútine *os ambostelta laurie quiltainen. 7 Ar quén i coition canta antane i valin otso tolpor otso maltava yar náner quante i ormeo Eruo, ye coita tennoio ar oi. 8 Ar i yána náne quátina usqueo, i alcarnen Eruo ar túreryanen, ar *úquen polde tule mir i yána tenna i ungwaler otso i valion otso náner telyane.

	5 And after these things I saw, and the sanctuary of the Tent of Witness was opened in heaven, 6 and the seven angels having the seven plagues went forth from the sanctuary, clad in pure, bright linen and bound about their breast with golden girdles. 7 And one of the four living cratures gave the seven angels seven bowls of gold that were full of the anger of God, who lives forever and ever. 8 And the sanctuary was filled with smoke, by the glory of God and by his power, and nobody could come into the sanctuary until the seven plagues of the seven angels were finished.

RANTA 16
Ar hlassen taura óma et i yánallo quéta i valannar otso: “Á lelya ar ulya i tolpor otso ormeva Eruo mir cemen!”
	2 Ar i minya etelende ar ulyane tolporya mir cemen. Ar túler şaure ar naicalie sisti i atanissen i sámer i hravano tehta ar *tyerner emmarya.
	3 Ar i attea ulyane tolporya mir ear. Ar olles serce ve i serce loicollo, ar ilya coirea onna qualle, i enger earesse.

CHAPTER 16
And I heard a mighty voice from the sanctuary say to the seven angels: “Go and pour the seven bowls of the anger of God into earth!”
	2 And the first went forth and poured his bowl into earth. And [there] came foul and painful ulcers on the men who had the mark of the beast and worshipped its image.
	3 And the second [one] poured his bowl into earth. And it became blood like the blood from a corpse, and every living creature died, [those] who were on earth.  

	4 Ar i neldea ulyane tolporya mir i síri ar i ehteler nenwa, ar ollelte serce. 5 Ar hlassen i vala i nenion quéta: “Faila nalye, i ea ar i enge, i aire, an sie anámiel! 6 An ulyanelte serce airion ar Erutercánoron, ar ániel tien serce sucien. Nalte valde!” 7 Ar hlassen i *yangwa quéta: “Ná, Héru Eru, i Iluvala, şande ar faile nar námielyar!”
	8 Ar i cantea ulyane tolporya Anarenna, ar Anaren náne antana urta atani nárnen. 9 Ar atani náner urtaine túra úrenen, mal huntelte i esse Eruo, ye sáme hére or ungwaler sine, ar ualte hirne inwis antáven sen alcar.

	4 And the third [one] poured his bowl into the rivers and the springs of water, and they became blood. 5 And I heard the angel of the waters say: “Righteous you are, [the one] who is and who was, the holy [one], for so you have passed judgment! 6 For they poured [out] blood of holy ones and of prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. They are worthy!” 7 And I heard the altar say: “Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments!”
	8 And the fourth [one] poured his bowl upon the Sun, and [it] was given to the Sun to burn men with fire.  9 And men were being burned by a great heat, but they cursed the name of God, who had authority over these plagues, and they did not find repentance so as to give him glory.

10 Ar i lempea ulyane tolporya i mahalmanna i hravanwa. Ar aranierya morniesse né, ar queni ñwarner lammalta i ñwalmanen, 11 mal Eru menelo huntelte ñwalmaltainen ar sistiltainen, ar ualte hirne inwis pa cardaltar.
12 Ar i enquea ulyane tolporya mir i hoa síre Perat, ar nénya olle parca, manwien i malle i aranin anarórello.

10 And the fifth [angel] poured his bowl upon the throne of the beast. And its kingdom was in darkness, and people gnawed their tongue because of the pain, 11 but [the] God of heaven they cursed because of their pain and their ulcers, and they did not find repentance concerning their works.
12 And the sixth [angel] poured his bowl into the great river Euphrates [Perat, based on Hebrew form], and its water became dry, to prepare the way for the kings from [the] sunrise.

13 Ar cennen úpoice fairi nelde, ve quáci, i túler et i antollo i hlóceo, ar et i antollo i hravano, ar et i antollo i *hurutercáno. 14 An nalte raucofairi i carir tanwali, ar etelendelte i arannar quanda Ambaro, comyáven te i ohtan i túra auresse Eru Iluvalo. 15 – “Yé! túlan ve arpo! Valima ná ye hepe inse cuiva ar hepe larmaryar, i ua mauyuva sen vanta helda ar queni cenuvar nucumnierya!” – 16 Ar comyaneltet i nómesse ya Heveryasse ná estaina Armahendon.

13 And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, who came out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. 14 For they are demon spirits that do signs, and they go forth to the kings of all the world, to gather them for the war on the great day of God Almighty. 15 – “Behold! I am coming like a thief! Happy is [he] who keeps himself awake and keeps his garments, [so] that he will not have to walk naked and people will see his humiliation!” – 16 And they gathered them in the place which in Hebrew is called Armageddon.

17 Ar i otsea ulyane tolporya vilyanna. Ar taura óma ettúle i yánallo, i mahalmallo, quétala: “Amarties!” 18 Ar enger ítali ar ómali ar hundiéli, ar martane *cempalie ta túra i lá amartie síte nat lan Atani amárier cemende – *cempalie ta palla hya ta túra. 19 Ar i hoa osto náne hyárina mir rantar nelde, ar atalanter i ostor i nóríva. Eru enyalde Vável Túra, ar sen-antanes i yulma i limpeo i ormeva rúşeryava. 20 Ilya tol úşe, ar oronti úner ambe hírine. 21 Sarneli *helexeva, hoe ve talenti, lantaner undu menello i queninnar. Mal queni hunter Eru i ungwalénen *helexeva, an i ungwale rúcima né.

17 And the seventh [one] poured his bowl upon [the] air. And a mighty voice came forth from the sanctuary, from the altar, saying: “It has happened!” 18 And there were flashes and voices and thunders, and there occurred an earthquake so great that [there] has not occurred a thing of this sort while men have been dwelling on earth – an earthquake so extensive or so great. 19 And the huge city was split into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed. God recalled Babylon the Great, and he gave her the cup of the anger of his wrath. 20 Every island fled, and [the] mountains were no more found.  21 Stones of hail, great as talents, fell down from heaven upon the people. But people cursed God because of the plague of hail, for the plague was terrible.

RANTA 17
Ar quén i valion otso i sámer i tolpor otso túle ar quente óni, quétala: “Tula, tanuvan lyen i námie i túra *imbacindeva ye hára or rimbe neneli, 2 as ye cemeno arani *hrupuhtaner, ar i marir cemende oller *limpunque *hrupuhtieryo limpenen.”
3 Ar ni-colles oa i Fairesse mir i ravanda. Ar cennen nís hárala mirucarne hravande quanta ession yar náner yaiwe Eruva, arwa carion otso ar rassion quean. 4 I nisso larmar náner *luicarni ar mirucarni. ar anes netyana maltanen ar mírínen ar marillainen, ar máryasse sámes yulma maltava quanta şaure nation ar i úpoice nation *hrupuhtieryo. 5 Ar timbareryasse náne técina esse, fóle: “Vável Túra, amil *imbacindion ar i şaure nation cemeno.” 6 Ar cennen in i nís náne *limpunqua i sercenen i airion ar i sercenen i *vettoron Yésuo.

CHAPTER 17
And one of the seven angels that had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying: “Come, I will show you the judging of the great harlot who is sitting over many waters, 2 with whom [the] kings of earth committed fornication, and those who dwell on earth became drunk by the wine of her fornication.”
3 And he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet [mirucarne, wine-red] beast full of names that were a mockery of God, having seven heads and ten horns. 4 The woman's garments were purple and scarlet, and she was adorned with gold and jewels and pearls, and in her hand she had a cup of gold full of foul things and the unclean things of her fornication. 5 And on her forehead was written a name, a mystery: “Babylon the Great, mother of harlots and the foul things of earth.” 6 And I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the holy ones and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus.

Íre cennenyes anen túra elmendasse. 7 Mal i vala quente ninna: “Manen ná i nalye elmendasse? Nyaruvan lyen i fóle i nisso ar i hravano se-cólala ar arwa i carion otso ar i rassion quean: 8 I hravan ye cennel enge, mal ea lá, ananta ortuvas et i undumello ar menuva oa mir nancarie. I marir cemende, ion essi uar técine i Parmasse Coiviéva tulciello i mardeva, nauvar quátine elmendanen íre cenilte manen i hravan enge, mal ea lá, ananta entuluva.
9 Sís ea maure handaléva arwa sailiéno: I cari otso nar oronti otso, ar tais i nís hára. 10 Ar ear arani otso: lempe alantier, er ea sí, ar i exe en ua utúlie, ar íre tuluvas, lemyuvas şinta lúmesse. 11 Ar i hravan ye enge mal ea lá, náse yú toltea aran; tulis i otsollo ar lelya oa mir nancarie.

When I saw her I was in great wonder. 7 But the angel said to me: “How [is it] that you are in wonder? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast carrying her and having the seven horns and the ten heads: 8 The beast that you saw was, but is not, and yet it shall rise out of the abyss and go away into destruction. Those who dwell on earth, whose names are not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the world, will be filled with wonder when they see how the beast was, but is not, and yet shall come again.
9 Here [there] is need for intelligence with wisdom: The seven heads are seven mountains, and on them the woman is sitting. [Tais: short locative of tai.] 10 And there are seven kings: five have fallen, one is now, and the other still has not come, and when he shall come, he will remain a short time. 11 And the beast that was but is not, it is also an eighth king; he comes from the seven and goes away into destruction.

	12 Ar i rassi quean yar cennel nar arani quean, i uar en acámie aranie, mal é camilte hére ve arani erya lúmesse as i hravan. 13 Samilte i imya sanwe ar antar túrelta ar hérelta i hravanen. 14 Mahtuvalte i Eulenna, mal pan náse Heru heruion ar Aran aranion, i Eule turúva te, as i yálinar ar *cílinar ar vorondar.”
	15 Ar eques ninna: “I neni yar cennel, yassen hára i *imbacinde, nar lier ar şangar ar nóri ar lambi. 16 Ar i rassi quean yar cennel, ar i hravan – tevuvalte i *imbacinde ar se-caruvar lusta ar helda, ar hráverya matuvalte, ar sé urtuvalte narnen. 17 An Eru panyane endaltassen care indómerya, carieltan erya sanwe ar antáveltan aranielta i hravanen, tenna Eruo quettar nar telyane. 18 Ar i nís ye cennel i túra osto ná, ya same aranie or i arani cemeno.”

	12 And the ten horns that you saw are ten kings, that still have not received a kingdom, but they do indeed receive authority as kings for a single hour with the beast. 13 They have the same thought and give their power and their authority to the beast. 14 They will fight against the Lamb, but since he is Lord of lords and King of Kings, the Lamb will conquer them, with the called and the chosen and the faithful.”
	15 And he says to me: “The waters that you saw, on which the harlot is sitting, are peoples and throngs and nations and tongues. 16 And the ten horns that you saw, and the beast – they will hate the harlot and shall make her empty and naked, and her flesh they will eat, and her they will burn with fire. 17 For God put [it] in their hearts to do his will, for them to do [or, carry out] a single thought and for them to give their kingdom to the beast, until God’s words are accomplished [telyaine, “completed”]. 18 And the woman whom you saw is the great city, that has a kingdom over the kings of earth.”

RANTA 18
Apa nati sine cennen hyana vala túla undu menello, arwa túra héreo, ar cemen náne calyaina alcareryanen. 2 Ar yámes taura ómanen: “Alanties! Alantie Vável Túra, ar olólies vehte raucoron ar mando ilya úpoica aiweo, ar mando ilya úpoica ar tévina hravano! 3 An i limpeo ormeva *hrupuhtieryo usúcier ilye nóri, ar cemeno arani *hrupuhtaner óse, ar cemeno macari oller lárie i túrenen úveryo pen landar!”

CHAPTER 18
After these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great authority [hére = lordship], and earth was being illuminated by his glory. 2 And he cried [out] with a strong voice: “She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, and she has become a haunt of demons and a prison of every unclean bird, and a prison of every unclean and hated beast! 3 For of the wine of anger of her fornication all nations have drunk, and the kings of earth committed fornication with her, and the tradesmen of earth became rich by the power of her abundance without bonds!”

	4 Ar hlassen hyana óma et menello quéta: “Á lelya et sello, lienya, pustien inde samiello ranta óse úcareryassen ar camiello ungwaleryon. 5 An i hahta úcareryaiva rahta menelenna, ar Eru enaiálie úfaile cardaryar. 6 Ásen nan-anta tambe ve sé nan-antane, ar cara sen atwa yaron isse acárie! Mir i yulma yanna ulyanes, á ulya atwa lesta issen! 7 Síve antanes alcar insen ar marne úvesse pen landar, tambe ásen anta ñwalme ar nyére! An enderyasse quetis: ’Háran tári, ar verunya ua aquálie nillo, ar uan oi istuva naire.’ 8 Etta ungwaleryar tuluvar erya auresse, qualme ar naire ar maitie, ar nauvas urtana nárnen, an polda ná i Héru Eru ye anámie se!

	4 And I heard another voice from heaven say: “Go out from her, my people, to stop yourselves from having [any] part with her in her sins and from receiving [any] of her plagues. 5 For the heap of her sins reaches to heaven, and God has recalled her unrighteous deeds. 6 Give back to her as she gave back, and do to her [the] double of [the things] that she has done! Into the cup into which she poured [a drink], pour a double measure for her! 7 As she gave glory to herself and dwelt in abundance without bounds, so [= to the same extent] give her torment and grief! For in her heart she says: “I sit a queen, and my husband has not died from me, and I will not ever know grief.” 8 Therefore her plagues will come in a single day, death and grief and hunger, and she will be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God who has judged her!

	9 Ar cemeno arani, i hrupuhtaner óse ar marner óse úvesse pen landar, nauvar níessen ar palpuvar inte nairenen sen, íre yétalte i usque ruiveryallo. 10 Táralte hairave caureltanen ñwalmeryava ar quétar: ’Horro, horro, a túra osto, Vável i polda osto, an erya lúmesse námielya utúlie!’

	9 And the kings of earth, who committed fornication with her and dwelt with her in abundance without bonds, will be in tears and will beat themselves because of grief for her, when they look at the reek from her burning [ruive: conflagration]. 10 They are standing far away in their fear of her torment and are saying: “Woe, woe, o great city, Babylon the strong city, for in a single hour your judgment has come!”

	11 Ar cemeno macari nar níessen ar se-nainar, an sí ea *úquen yen polilte vace armaltar, 12 armar ve malta ar telpe ar míri ar marillar ar mára *páşe ar *luicarne ar samin ar mirucarne, ar ilya níşima tavar ar ilya vene *mortavarwa ar ilya vene ammaira tavarwa ar urus ar anga ar alas, 13 ar cinnamon ar amomum ar *nisque ar níşima millo ar *ninquima ar limpe ar *piemillo ar mulma ar ore ar yaxir ar mámar, ar roccor ar luncar ar móli – coirie queni. 14 É i mára yáve ya náne fealyo íre oantie lyello, ar ilye i netye nati ar i calwe nati nar vanwe lyen, ar mo ua oi enhiruva tai.

	11 And the tradesmen of earth are in tears and lament her, for now there is nobody to whom they can sell their goods, 12 goods like gold and silver and jewels and fine linen and purple and silk and scarlet, and every fragrant wood and every vessel of ivory and every vessel of most precious wood and copper and iron and marble, 13 and cinnamon and amomum [Indian spice] and frankincense and wine and olive oil and fine floor and grain and cows and sheep, and horses and wagons and slaves – living persons. 14 Indeed the good fruit that was your soul's desire has passed away from you, and all the dainty things and the beautiful things are lost to you, and one will not ever find them again.

	15 I macari mancala sine nati, i náner cárine lárie sello, taruvar hairave caureltanen ñwalmeryava ar nauvar niessen ar samuvar naire, 16 quétala: ’Horro, horro – i túra osto, vaina mi *páşe ar *luicarne ar mirucarne, ar netyana maltanen ar mírenen ar marillanen, 17 an erya lúmesse lar ta túra nancarna né!’

	15 The tradesmen trading [in] these things, who were made rich from her, will stand far away in their fear of her torment and will be in tears and shall have grief, 16 saying: ‘Woe, woe – the great city, clad in linen and purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and jewel and pearl, 17 for in a single hour riches so great were destroyed!’ [nancarna, “undone”; also notice that lar “riches” is singular in Quenya.]

	Ar ilya hesto ar ilquen ye lelya ciryanen, ar ciryamor ar illi i mótar earesse, tarner hairave 18 ar yámer íre yentelte i usque ruiveryallo ar quenter: ’Man mici ostor ná ve i túra osto?’ 19 Ar hantelte asto careltanna ar yámer mi nier ar naire, ar quenter: ’Horro, horro – i túra osto, yasse illi i samir ciryar earesse oller lárie túra almaryanen, an erya lúmesse anes nancarna!’
20 Na valime issenen, a menel ar i airi ar i aposteli ar i Erutercánor, an eldenen Eru equétie námie senna!”

	And every captain and everyone who travels by ship, and mariners and all who work at sea, stood far away 28 and cried [out] when they looked at the reek from her burning and said: ‘Who among cities is like the great city?’ 19 And they threw dust upon their head and cried [out] in tears and grief, and said: ‘Woe, woe – the great city, where all who have ships at sea became rich by her great wealth, for in a single hour she was destroyed!’
	20 Be glad because of her, o heaven and the holy ones and the apostles and the prophets, for because of [-nen] you God has pronounced judgment against her!”
	
	21 Ar polda vala ortane haura *mulondo ar sa-hante mir ear, quétala: ”Sie, lintave, Vável Túra nauva hátina undu, ar uas oi nauva enhirna. 22 Ar i lamma ñandaroron ar nyelloron ar simpetarion ar *hyólamoron laume nauva hlárina lyesse ambe, ar tanor ilye curwion laume nauvar hírine lyesse ambe, ar i lamma *mulondollo laume nauva hlárina lyesse ambe, 23 ar cala calmo laume caltuva lyesse ambe, ar óma endero hya indisso laume nauva hlárina lyesse ambe; an macarilyar náner i minde neri cemeno, an ñúlelyanen ilye nóri náner tyárine vare. 24 Ente, sesse náne hírina i serce Erutercánólion ar airilion ar illion i náner nahtane cemende.”

	21 And a strong angel lifted up a huge mill-stone and threw it into [the] sea, saying: “Thus, quickly, Babylon the Great will be thrown down, and she will not ever be found again. 22 And the sound of harpers and singers and flutists and trumpeters will by no means be heard in you [any]more, and craftsmen of all crafts will by no means be found in you [any]more, and the sound from a mill-stone will by no means heard in you [any]more, 23 and light of a lamp will by no means shine in you [any]more; for your tradesmen were the prominent men of earth, and by your sorcery all nations were caused to err. 24 Furthermore, in her was found the blood of prophets and holy ones and of all who were killed in earth.”

RANTA 19
Apa nati sine hlassen ya né ve taura óma haura rimbeo menelde. Quentelte: “Hallelúya! I rehtie ar i alcar ar i túre nar Ainolvo, 2 an şande ar faile nar námieryar! An anámies i túra *imbacinde ye hastane cemen *hrupuhtieryanen, ar Eru atacárie núroryaron serce et máryallo.” 3 Ar mi attea lú quentelte: “Hallelúya! Ar i usque sello orta ama tennoio ar oi!”

CHAPTER 19
After these things I heard [something] that was like a mighty voice of a huge multitude in heaven. They said: “Hallelujah! The salvation and the glory and the power are our God’s, 2 for true and just are his judgments! For he has judged the great harlot who marred the earth with her fornication, and God has avenged his servants’ blood out of her hand. 3 And [for] the second time they said: “Hallelujah! And the reek from her rises up forever and ever!”

	4 Ar i amyárar canta *yúquean ar i coiti canta lantaner undu ar *tyerner Eru i hárane i mahalmasse, ar quenter: “Násie! Hallelúya!”
	5 Ar óma túle i mahalmallo, quétala: “Á laita Ainolva, ilye núroryar i rucir sello, i pityar yo i túrar!”

	4 And the four and twenty elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who was sitting on the throne, and said: “Amen! Hallelujah!”
	5 And a voice came from the throne, saying: “Praise our God, all his servants who fear him, the small and the great!”

	6 Ar hlassen ya náne ve óma hoa şango ar ve lamma rimbe nenion ar ve lamma polde hundiéron. quétala: “Hallelúya, an i Héru Ainolva anaie carna aran, i Iluvala! 7 Alve na valime ar same alasse, ar alve anta sen i alcar, an i Euleo veryanwe utúlie, ar vesserya amanwiexe. 8 Ar náne sen antana náve vaina calima, poica *páşesse, an i *páşe i faile cardar i airion ná.”
	9 Ar nyaris nin: “Teca: Valime i nar tultane i merendenna i veryanweo i Euleo!” Ente, eques ninna: “Sine nar i nanwe quettar Eruo.”

	6 And I heard [something] that was like a voice of a huge multitude and like [the] sound of many waters and like the sound of strong thunders, saying: “Hallelujah, for the Lord our God has been made king, the Almighty! 7 Let us be happy and have joy, and let us give him the glory, for the wedding of the Lamb has come, and his wife has prepared herself. 8 And [it] was given her to be clad in bright, pure linen, for the linen is the righteous deeds of the holy ones.”
	9 And he tells me: “Write: Happy [those] who are invited to the feast of the wedding of the Lamb!” Furthermore, he said to me: “These are the true words of God.”

	10 Ar lantanen undu epe taluryat *tyerien se. Mal nyaris nin: “Cima! Áva care! Nanye rie núro as lyé ar hánolyar, i samir i *vettie Yésuo! Eru alye *tyere!” An i *vettie Yésuo ná i apacéno faire.

	10 And I fell down before his feet to worship him. But he says to me: “Take heed! Do not do [it]! I am solely a servant with you and your brothers, who have the witness of Jesus! God you are to worship!” For the witness of Jesus is the spirit of the prophecy.

	11 Ar cennen menel latyana, ar yé! ninque rocco! Ar ye hamme sesse ná estaina Voronda ar Şanda, ar namis ar mahtas failiesse. 12 Henduryat nát ve uruite ruine, ar caryasse ear rimbe *şarnuntali. Samis esse técina ya *úquen ista hequa issue erinqua. 13 Náse vaina collasse sumbana sercesse, ar i esse yanen náse estaina Eruo Quetta ná. 14 Menelo hossi se-hilyaner ninqui roccossen ar vaine mi ninque ar poica *páşe. 15 Ar et antoryallo mene aica andamacil, yanen petuvas nóri, ar tai-turuvas angaina vandilden. *Vattas i *limpevorma i ormeva i rúşeva Eru Iluvalo. 16 Ar collaryasse, tiucoryasse, samis esse técina: Aran Aranion ar Heru Heruion.

	11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold! a white horse. And [he] who sat on it was called Faithful and True, and he judges and he fights in righteousness. 12 His eyes are like burning fire, and on his head are many diadems. He has a name written that nobody knows except he alone. 13 He is clad in a cloak dipped in blood, and the name by which he is called is God’s Word. 14 Heaven’s armies followed him on white horses and clad in white and pure linen. 15 And from his mouth [there] goes a sharp longsword, with which he will strike [the] nations, and he will rule them with an iron rod. He treads the wine-press of the anger of the wrath of God Almighty. 16 And on his cloak, on his thigh, he has a name written: King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

	17 Ar cennen vala tárala Anaresse, ar yámes taura ómanen ar quente ilye aiwennar i vilir menelo endesse: “Tula, ócoma Eruo túra merendenna, 18 matien hráve aranion, hráve cánoron ar hráve polde nerion, hráve roccoron ar ion hammer tesse, i hráve illion, léraron ar mólion, pityaron yo túraron.”

	17 And I saw an angel standing in the Sun, and he cried in a mighty voice and said to all birds who fly in the midst of heaven: “Come, gather for God’s great feast, 18 to eat flesh of kings, flesh of commanders and flesh of strong men, flesh of horses and of [those] who sat on them, the flesh of all, of rich ones and of slaves, of small ones and great ones.

	19 Ar cennen i hravan ar cemeno arani ar hosseltar comyane ohtacarien yenna hamme i roccosse ar hosseryanna. 20 Ar i hravan náne mapana, ar as sé i *hurutercáno ye carne i tanwar epe se, yainen tyarnes vare i camner i tehta i hravano ar *tyerner emmarya. Anette yúyo hátine coirie mir i ailin náreva ya urya *ussardenen. 21 I exi náner nahtane i andamacilden ya lende et antollo yeo hamme i roccosse, ar ilye i aiwi náner quátine hráveltanen.

	19 And I saw the beast and the kings of earth and their armies gathered to make war upon [he] who sat on the horse and upon his army. 20 And the beast was seized, and with it the false prophet who did the signs before it, by which it caused to err [those] who received the sign of the beast and worshiped its image. They were both thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulphur. 21 The others were killed by the sword that went out of the mouth of [him] who sat upon the horse, and all the birds were filled with their flesh.

RANTA 20
Ar cennen vala túla undu et menello arwa i *latilo i undumeo ar hoa naxa máryasse. 2 Ar nampes i hlóce, i yára leuca, ye i Arauco ar Sátan ná, ar avaleryane hé loain húme. 3 Ar hantes hé mir i undume ar sa-holtane ar sa-*lihtane or hé, pustien hé tyariello nóri vare nó i húme loar náner vanwe. Epeta hé nauva leryana şinta lúmen.

CHAPTER 20
And I saw an angel come down out of heaven having the key to the abyss and a huge chain in his hand. 2 And he took the dragon, the ancient serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years. 3 And he threw him into the abyss and closed it and sealed it over him, to stop him from causing [the] nations to stray before the thousand years were passed. After that he will be freed for a short time.

	4 Ar cennen mahalmali, ar enger i hamuner tais, ar námotúre náne ten antana. Ar cennen i fear ion náner nahtane pelecconen *vettiénen pa Yésus ar quetiénen pa Eru, ar ion uar *etyérie i hravan hya emmarya ar uar acámie i tehta timbareltasse hya máltasse. Túlelte coivienna ar turner as Hristo ter i loar húme. 5 I exi i qualinaron uar túle coivienna nó i loar húme náner vanwe. Si i minya enortie ná. 6 Valima ar aire ná ye same ranta i minya enortiesse. Or té i attea ñuru ua same hére, mal nauvalte *airimor Eruo ar Hristo, ar turuvalte óse ter i loar húme.

	4 And I saw thrones, and [there] were those who sat down on them, and power of judgment was given to them. And I saw the souls of [those] who were slain by axe for witnessing about Jesus and for speaking about God, and of [those] who have not worshipped the beast or its image and have not received the sign on their forehead or their hand. They came to life and ruled with Christ for a thousand years. 5 The others [or, the rest] of the dead did not come to life before the thousand years were passed. This is the first resurrection. 6 Happy and holy is [the one] who has a part in the first resurrection. Over them the second death does not have authority, but they shall be priests of God and Christ, and they shall rule with him through the thousand years.

	7 Íre i loar húme avánier, Sátan nauva leryana mandoryallo. 8 Etelelyuvas tyarien vare i nóri i vincassen canta cemeno, Cóc yo Mácoc, te-comyáven i ohtan, únótime ve earo litse. 9 Lendelte ama olla i palla cemen ar pelder i *estolie i airíva ar i melda osto. Mal nár túle undu menello ar te-ammante. 10 Ar i Arauco ye tyarne te vare náne hátina mir i ailin nárwa ar *ussarneva, yasse yúyo i hravan ar i *hurutercáno enget, ar nauvalte ñwalyaine auresse yo lómisse tennoio.

	7 When the thousand years have passed, Satan will be freed from his prison. 8 He will go forth to cause to err the nations in the four corners of earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them for the war, countless like the sand of [the] sea. 9 They went up over the broad earth and surrounded the camp of the holy ones and the beloved city. But fire came down from heaven and consumed them. 10 And the Devil who caused them to err was thrown into the lake of fire and sulphur, where both the beast and the false prophet were, and they shall be tormented at day and at night forever.

	11 Ar cennen túra ninque mahalma ar ye hande sasse. Cendeleryallo cemen yo menel úşet oa, ar nóme úne hírina tún. 12 Cennen yú qualinar, i túrar yo i pityar, tárala epe i mahalma, ar parmali náner latyane. Tá náne latyana hyana parma, ya i Parma Coiviéva ná. Ar qualinar náner námine i natinen técine i parmassen, ve cardaltar. 13 Ar ear antane nan i qualinar sasse, ar ñuru ar Mandos antaner nan i qualinar mi tú, ar anelte námine, ilquen ve cardaryar náner. 14 Ar ñuru ar Mandos náner hátine mir i ailin nárwa. Si i attea ñuru ná: i ailin nárwa. 15 Ar qui aiquen úne hirna técina i Parmasse Coiviéva, anes hátina mir i ailin nárwa.

	11 And I saw a great white throne and [he] who sat on it. From his face earth and heaven fled away, and place was not found for them [/no place was found for them]. 12 I saw also [the] dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Then was opened another book, which is the Book of Life. And [the] dead were judged by the things written in the books, according to their deeds. 13 And [the] sea gave back the dead in it, and death and Mandos [Hades] gave back the dead in them, and they were judged, everyone as his deeds were. 14 And death and Mandos were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death: the lake of fire. 15 And if anyone was not found written in the Book of Life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.

RANTA 21  
Ar cennen vinya menel yo vinya cemen, an i minya menel yo i minya cemen nánet vanwe, ar ear ua ambe enge. 2 Cennen yú i aire osto, Vinya Yerúsalem, túla undu et menello, manwana ve indis netyana veruryan. 3 Ar hlassen taura óma i mahalmallo quéta: “Yé! I már Eruva ea as Atani, ar maruvas aselte, ar nauvalte lieryar. Ar Eru immo euva aselte. 4 Mapuvas oa ilya nie hendultalto, ar ñuru ua ambe euva; yú naire ar rambe ar ñwalma uar ambe euvar. I noe nati avánier.”

CHAPTER 21
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were gone, and [the] sea was no more. 2 I saw also the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. 3 And I heard a mighty voice from the throne say: “Behold! The home of God is with Men, and he shall dwell with them, and they shall be his peoples. And God himself shall be with them. 4 He will take away every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more; also grief and outcry and pain will be no more. The former things have passed away.”  

	5 Ar ye hande i mahalmasse quente: “Yé! Envinyatan ilye nati!” Ar eques: “Teca, an quettar sine nar voronde ar şande!” 6 Ar quentes ninna: “Nas cárina! Inye Tinco ar Úre, i yesse yo i metta. Ilquenen ye soica ná inye antauva i ehtelello i nenwa coiviéva, muntan. 7 Aiquen ye turue nauva aryon sine nation; inye nauva Ainorya, ar isse nauva yondonya. 8 Mal i caurear ar i úsavilar ar i şaurar ar i nehtari ar i *hrupuhtandor ar i carir ñúle ar i *tyerir cordoni, ar ilye *hurindor – masselta ea i ailinde uryala nárnen ar *ussarnenen. Si i attea ñuru ná.”

	5 And [he] who sat on the throne said: “Behold! I make all things new!” And he says: “Write, for these words are faithful and true!” 6 And he said to me: “It is done! I [am] Tinco and Úre [= Alpha and Omega], the beginning and the end. To everyone who is thirsty I will give from the spring of the water of life, for nothing. 7 Anyone who conquers shall be heir to these things; I will be his God, and he will be my son. 8 But the cowards and the unbelieving and the disgusting ones and the murderers and the fornicators and those who practice sorcery and worship idols, and all liars – their portion is in the lake burning with fire and sulfur. This is the second death.”

	9 Quén i valion otso i sámer i tolpor otso quante i métime ungwaleron otso túle quetien óni ar quente: “Tula! Lyen-tanuvan i indis, i Euleo veri.” 10 Fairenen coldesen oa hoa ar tára orontenna, ar tannes nin i aire osto Yerúsalem túlala undu et menello, Erullo, 11 ar samila i alcar Eruo. Ñaltarya ná ve ammaira míre, ve *nambíre caltala ve maril. 12 Sámes hoa ar tára ramba ar andor yunque, ar ara i andor vali yunque, ar i andossen náner técine i essi i nossion yunque Israelindion: 13 andor nelde Rómenna, andor nelde Formenna, andor nelde Hyarmenna, ar andor nelde Númenna. 14 Ar i ostoramba sáme *talmondor yunque, ar técine tais enger i essi i apostelion yunque i Euleo.

	9 One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came to speak with me and said: “Come! I will show you the bride, the Lamb’s wife.” 10 By spirit he carried me away to a huge and tall mountain, and he showed me the holy city [of] Jerusalem coming down out of heaven, from God, 11 and having the glory of God. Its radiance was like a most precious jewel, a jasper shining like glass. 12 It had a huge and tall wall and twelve gates, and beside the gates twelve angels, and on the gates were written the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel: 13 three gates to [the] East, three gates to [the] North, three gates to [the] south, and three gates to [the] West. 14 And the city wall has twelve foundation stones, and written on them were the names of the apostles of the Lamb.

	15 Ar ye carampe ninna sáme ve lesta maltasirpe, polieryan *lesta i osto ar andoryar ar rambarya. 16 I osto *cantil ná, ar nas ve anda ve nás palla. Ar *lestanes i osto i sirpenen, *restandier húmi yunque; andierya ar pallierya ar tárierya nar imye. 17 *Lestanes yú rambarya, *perrangar canta *canaquean ar tuxa, i lestanen atano, ar yú valo.

	15 And [he] who spoke to me had as a measure a golden rod, for him to be able to measure the city and its gates and its wall. 16 The city is a square, and it is as long as it is wide. And he measured the city with the rod, twelve thousand furlongs; its length and its width and its height are [the] same. 17 He measured also its wall, a hundred and forty-four cubits, by the measure of man, and also an angel’s.

	18 I ramba náne cárina *nambíreva, ar i osto náne poica malta, ve poica cilin. 19 I talmar i ostorambo náner netyane ilya nostalénen mírion: I minya *talmondo *nambíre né, i attea lúle, i neldea *ostimmir, i cantea *laimaril, 20 i lempea *fanorcarne, i enquea *culmíre, i otsea *malatsar, i toltea elessar, i nertea *sinile, i quainea *orvamir, i minquea *linquemir, ar i yunquea *helissar.
	21 Ente, i andor yunque náner marillar yunque; ilya ando náne er marilla. Ar i osto malle náne poica malta, ve *tercénima calca.

	18 The wall was made of jasper, and the city was pure gold, like pure glass. 19 The foundations of the city wall were adorned with every kind of jewels: The first foundation stone was a jasper, the second sapphire, the third agate, the fourth emerald, 20 the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh hyacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
	21 Furthermore, the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every gate was one pearl. And the street of the city was pure gold, as transparent glass.

	22 Ar uan cenne corda sasse, an i Héru Eru Iluvala cordarya ná, ar sie ná i Eule. 23 I osto ua same maure Anarwa hya Işilwa caltien sanna, an Eruo alcar sa-calyane, ar calmarya i Eule né. 24 Ar nóri vantuvar i calanen i ostollo, ar cemeno arani taluvar alcarelta minna sa. 25 Ar andoryar laume nauvar holtane auresse, an lá euva lóme tasse. 26 Ar taluvalte i nórion alcar ar *laitie minna sa. 27 Mal aiqua úaire ar aiquen ye care şaura nat ar huru ua tuluva minna sa, mal rie i nar técine i parmasse coiviéva i Euleva.

	22 And I did not see [any] temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and so is the Lamb. 23 The city does not have need of Sun or Moon to shine upon it, for God’s glory illuminated it, and its lamp was the Lamb. 24 And [the] nations shall walk by the light from the city, and the kings of earth will bring their glory into it. 25 And its gates will by no means be shut at day, for there will not be night there. 26 And they shall send the glory and honor of the nations into it. 27 But anything unholy and anybody who practices a disgusting thing and a lie will not come into it, but solely [those] who are written in the book of life of the Lamb.  

RANTA 22
Ar tannes nin síre i nenwa coiviéva, *tercénima ve maril, sirila i mahalmallo Eruva ar i Euleva, 2 i endesse i palla malleo i ostosse. Ar foryasse ar hyaryasse i síreo enge i Alda Coiviéva ye cole yáve lúr yunque, antala yáverya ilya astasse. Ar i Aldo lassi nar i nestien nóriva.
	3 Lá ambe euva erya nat ya húna ná. Mal i mahalma Eruva ar i Euleva euva tasse, ar núroryar se-*veuyuvar. 4 Cenuvalte cendelerya, ar esserya euva timbareltasse. 5 Ar lóme lá ambe euva, ar ualte samuva maure calava calmo hya calava Anaro, an i Héru Eru te-calyuva, ar turuvalte tennoio ar oi.

CHAPTER 22
And he showed me a river of the water of life, transparent like crystal, flowing out from the throne of God and of the Lamb, 2 in the midst of the broad street in the city. And to the right and to the left of the river was the Tree of Life that bears fruit twelve times, giving its fruit every month. And the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of [the] nations.
	3 [There] will no more be a single thing that is cursed. But God’s throne and the Lamb’s will be there, and his servants will serve him. 4 They will see his face, and his name will be on their forehead. 5 And night will be no more, and they will not have need of light of a lamp or light of Sun, for the Lord God shall illuminate them, and they will rule forever and ever.

	6 Ar eques ninna: “Quettar sine nar voronde ar şande. I Héru, i Aino fairion i Erutercánoron, ementaye valarya tanáven núroryain yar ron martuvar. 7 Yé! tuluvan ron! Valima ná ye cime i quettar i apacéno parma sino.”
8 Ar inye Yoháno náne ye hlasse ar cenne nati sine. Ar apa hlarie ar cenie, lantanen undu *tyerien epe talu i valo ye nin-tanne nati sine. 9 Mal quetis ninna: ”Cima! Áva care! Nanye hyana núro as lyé ar hánolyar i nar Erutercánor, ar as i cimir i quettar parma sino! *Tyera Eru!”  

6 And he said to me: “These words are faithful and true. The Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his servants [the] things that soon will happen. 7 See! I will come soon! Happy is [he] who heeds the words of the prophecy of this book.”
8 And I John was [the one] who heard and saw these things. And after hearing and seeing, I fell down to worship before [the] feet of the angel who showed me these things. 9 But he says to me: “Take heed! Do not do [it]! I am another servant with you and your brothers who are prophets, and with [the ones] who heed the words of this book! Worship God!”

10 Ar quetis ninna: ”Áva *lihta i quettar i apacéno parma sino, an i lúme hare ná. 11 Yen care úfailie lava care úfailie en; ar i váran lava ole vára en; mal lava i failan care failie en, ar lava yen aire ná ole aire en.
12 Yé! Tuluvan ron, ar ya paityan ea asinye, antáven nan ilquenen ve molierya ná. 13 Inye Tinco ar Úre, i minya ar i métima, i yesta ar i metta. 14 Valime nar i sovir collaltar, i lertuvalte tule i Aldanna Coiviéva ar lelya mir i osto ter i andor. 15 I ettesse ear i huor ar i carir ñúle ar i *hrupuhtandor ar i nehtari ar illi i melir ar carir huru.

10 And he says to me: “Do not seal [up] the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near. 11 Let [the one] who does unrighteousness, do unrighteousness still; and let the dirty one become dirty still; but let the righteous one do righteousness still, and let the holy one become holy still.
12 Behold! I shall come soon, and what I pay is with me, in order to give back to everyone as his work is. 13 I [am] Tinco and Úre [Alpha and Omega], the first and the last, the beginning and the end. 14 Happy are [the ones] who wash their coats, that they may come to the Tree of Live and go into the city through the gates. 15 On the outside are the dogs and those who do magic and the fornicators and the murderers and all who love and practice a lie.

16 Inye Yésus mentane valanya *vettien lyen pa nati sine i ocombin. Inye Laviro şundo ar erde ná, ar i calima arintinwe.”
17 I Faire ar i indis quétar: “Tula!” Ar lava yen hlare quete: “Tula!” Ar lava i soican tule; lava yen mere, mapa i nén coiviéva muntan.

16 I Jesus sent my angel to witness to you about these things for the congregations. I am David’s root and seed, and the bright morning star.”
17 The Spirit and the bride are saying: “Come!”And let [the one] who hears say: “Come!” And let the thirsty one come; let the one who wishes, take the water of life for nothing.

18 Inye *vetta ilquenen i hlarir i quettar i apacéno parma sino: Qui aiquen napane sine natinnar, Eru napanuva senna i ungwaler pa yar ná técina parma sinasse; 19 ar qui aiquen mapa *aiqua oa i quettallon i apacéno parma sino, Eru mapuva oa rantarya i Aldasse Coiviéva ar i aire ostosse, pa yar ná técina parma sinasse.
20 Ye *vetta pa sine nati quete: “Ná, tuluvan ron!” Násie! Tula, a Heru Yésus!
21 Nai i Heru Yésus Hristo lisse euva as i airi!

18 I witness to everyone who hear the words of the prophecy of this book: If anyone adds to these things, God will add to him the plagues about which [it] is written in this book; 19 and if anyone takes anything away from the words of the prophecy of this book, God will take away his part in the Tree of Life and the in the holy city, about which [it] is written in this book.
20 [He] who bears witness about these things says: “Yes, I shall come soon!” Amen! Come, O Lord Jesus!
21 May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the holy ones!
