TÍTONNA

To Titus

---

RANTA 1
Paulo – Eruo mól ar Yésus Hristo apostel, Eruo cílinaron saviénen ar i istyanen i nanwiéva ya hilya áyallo Eruva, 2 i estelden i oira coiviéva pa ya Eru, ye ua pole hure, antane vanda nó oialie lúmeli, 3 ómu vére lúmeryassen apantanes quettarya cariénen sa sinwa, i molie yan inye náne sátina i canwanen Eru *Rehtolvallo –  4 Títonna, anwa hína i saviesse ya uo samingwe: Lisse yo raine ho Eru i Atar ar Hristo Yésus *Rehtolva. 

CHAPTER 1
Paul – God's slave and Jesus Christ's apostle, by the faith of God's chosen ones and by the knowledge of the truth that follows from awe of God, 2 by the hope [estel-nen > estelden] of eternal life about which God, who cannot lie, gave a promise before everlasting times, 3 though in his own times he revealed his word by making it known, the work for which I was reserved by the command from God who saves us – 4 to Titus [Tito], real child in the faith that we [dual] together have: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior. 

	5 Sina castanen lye-tyarnen lemya Hrétasse, carielyan tére i penye nattor ar satielyan amyárar ilya ostosse, ve cannen lyen: 6 qui ea aiquen napsa pella, erya verio veru, arwa savila hínalion i uar nu napsa verca coiviéno hya amortala. 7 An mauya in *úquen pole quete ulco pa *ortirmo ve Eruo mardil. Mauya in uas quén ye fasta inse, lá linta rúşenna hya antaina limpen hya quén ye palpa hya ná milca úfaila ñétien, 8 mal nilda etteleain, meldo máriéno, málesse sámo, faila, aire, istala ture inse, 9 tancave hepila i voronda quetta peantieryasse, ecien sen horta i aşea peantiénen ar yando naitya i quetir ana se.

	5 For [-nen] this reason I made you remain in Crete [Hréta], for you to make straight the deficient matters and for you to appoint elders in every city, as I commanded you, 6 if there is anyone beyond suspicion, husband of a single wife, having believing children that are not under suspicion of a wild life or rebellious [amortala = uprising]. 
	7 For it is necessary that nobody can speak evil about an overseer as God's steward. It is necessary that he is not a person who pleases himself, not quick to anger or given to wine or one who beats or is greedy for unjust gain, 8 but friendly to strangers, a friend of what is good [márie, goodness], in health of mind, just, holy, knowing [how] to control himself, 9 firmly keeping the faithful word of his teaching, so that it is possible for him to urge by the beneficial teaching and also rebuke those that speak against him.

	10 An ear rimbe *útúrime queni, i quetir cumne nati ar şahtar i sáma, or ilqua i himyar i *oscirie. 11 Mauya holta antolta, an queni sine nuquerir quande nossi peantiénen pa ya ua vanima, íresse úfaila ñetiéva. 12 Quén mici te, véra Erutercánolta, quente: "I Hrétear illume hurir, nála ulce hravani, úmolila cumbar." 13 Ya quetis nanwa ná. Etta áte naitya mi naraca lé, samieltan mále i saviesse, 14 lá címala Yúre nyarier ar axani atanion i querir inte oa i nanwiello. 15 Ilye nati nar poice poicain, mal quenin i nar vahtaine ar ú sáviéno munta poica ná, mal sámalta ar *immotuntielta véla nar vahtaine. 16 Quetilte in istalte Eru, mal cardaltainen lalalte se, pan nalte yelwe ar amortala, ar pa ilya mára carie nalte quérine oa. 

	10 For there are many unruly people, who speak empty things and seduce the mind, above everything [the ones] who stick to the circumcision. 11 It is necessary to stop their mouth, for these people subvert entire families by teaching what is not proper, in a desire for [-va] unjust gain. 12 One among them, their own prophet, said: "The Cretans always lie, being wild beasts [hravan-li > hravalli], unemployed [ú-mólala "un-working"] bellies." 13 What he says is true. Therefore rebuke them in a harsh manner, for them to have health in the faith, 14 not heeding Jewish fables and commands of men who turn themselves away from the truth. 15 All things are clean to clean ones, but to people that are defiled and without faith nothing is pure, but their mind and their conscience alike are defiled. 16 They say that they know God, but by their deeds they deny him, since they are disgusting and rebellious, and concerning every good doing they are turned away [rejected, disapproved].

RANTA 2
Mal elye, queta yar nar aşie *málea peantien! 2 Mauya yáre nerin náve nalde haimeltassen, *sanwelunge, málesse sámo ar saviéno ar melmeo ar voronwiéno. 3 Mi imya lé, mauya i yáre nissin lenga áyanen, lá quetila ulco pa exi hya nála móli olya limpeo, peantala ya mára ná, 4 sie *rentala i nesse nissi i mauya tien mele verultar, mele hínaltar, 5 same mále sámo, náve poice, molila i coasse, nála mani, panyala inte nu verultar – pustien aiquen naiquetiello Eruo quetta.

CHAPTER 2
But you, say [the things] that are beneficial for healthy teaching. 2 It is necessary for the elder men to be lowly [moderate] in their habits, serious, in health of mind and of faith and of love and of endurance. 3 In a similar manner, it is necessary for the elder women to behave with respect, not speaking evil about others or being slaves of much wine, teaching what is good, 4 so reminding the young women that it is necessary for them to love their husbands, love their children, 5 have health of mind, to be pure, working in the house, be good, subjecting themselves to [lit. putting themselves under] their husbands – to stop anyone from blashpheming God's word.

	6 Mi imya lé á horta i nesse neri náve hande, 7 mi ilye nati tánala imle ve *epemma máre cardaron. Peantielyasse á tana i nalye alahasta, *sanwelunga, 8 quetila aşea questa ya *úquen pole nattire; sie cotya quén nauva naityaina, pénala şaura nat ya polis quete pa vi. 9 Nai móli panyuvar inte nu herultar mi ilqua, fastala te mai, lá *nancarpala, 10 lá pilila, mal tánala mára savie, sie netyala i peantie *Rehtolvo, Eru, mi ilye nati. 

	6 In the same manner exhort the young men to be sensible, 7 in all things showing yourself as an example of good deeds. In your teaching show that you are incorrupt, serious, 8 speaking beneficial speech which nobody can despise; thus a hostile person will be ashamed, lacking [any] foul thing that he can say about us. 9 May slaves put themselves under [= subject themselves to] their lords in everything, pleasing them well, not talking back, 10 not stealing, but showing good faith, thus adorning the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.

	11 An i Erulisse ya tala rehtie ilye atanin anaie apantaina, 12 peantala ven hehta i Erucotie ar i mardo íri ar mare mi mále sámo ar failie ar Eruáya mi randa sina, 13 yétala ompa i valima estelenna ar i alquarinqua apantie i túra Eruva ar *Rehtolvava, Hristo Yésus, 14 ye antanexe vi-etelehtien ilya *şányelóriello ar poitien insen lie aqua véra – lie uryala carien máre cardar. 
	15 Queta nati sine ar á horta ar naitya, quanta túrelyanen. Áva lave aiquenen nattire lye!

	11 For the grace which brings salvation to all men has been revealed, 12 instructing us to abandon ungodliness [Erucotie, hostility to God] and the desires of the world in good health of mind and righteousness and godliness in this age, 13 looking forward to the happy hope and the glorious revelation of the mightly God and of our Saviour, Christ Jesus, 14 who gave him selve to deliver us from all lawlessness and to purify for himself a people wholly [his] own – a people burning to do good deeds. 
	15 Say these things and exhort and rebuke, by your full power. Do not let anyone despise you! TIL HIT

RANTA 3
Alye *renta te i panyuvaltexer nu turier ar héri, náven manwe ilya mára cardan. 2 Á quetir ulco pa *úquen, la merila cos, nála maxe sámo, lengala moicave ilye atanin. 3 An enge lúme yasse yando elve náner ú handeo, lá *canwacimye, tyárine ranya, ve móli írion ar *alavéle mailion, lemyala mi ulco ar *hrúcen – yelwe, tévala quén i exe.
	4 Mal íre *Rehtolvo ar Ainolvo nildie ar melme ataniva náner apantaine, 5 – lá faile cardainen yar elve carner, mal oravieryasse – vi-rehtanes i sovallenen ya vi-care nóne ata ar envinyante, Aire Feanen. 6 Ulyanes úvea lesta fea sino venna, ter Yésus Hristo, *Rehtolva. 7 Sie, apa náve *failante tana Queno lissenen, polilve náve aryoni estelo oira coiviéva.

CHAPTER 3
You remind them that they are to subject themselves [place themselves under] governments [turier, rulings] and authorities [héri, "lordships"], for them to be ready for every good work. 2 They [-lte] are to speak evil about no one, not desiring dispute, being reasonable [lit. pliant] of mind, behaving gently to[wards] all men. 2 For [there] was a time in which we as well were without understandig, not obedient, made to stray, as slaves of desires and various lusts, remaining in evil and envy – despicable, hating one the other.
	4 But when our Savior's and God's kindness [nildie, friendliness] and love of men were revealed 5 – not by just deeds that we did, but by his mercy – he saved us by the bath that make us born again and renewed, by Holy Spirit. 6 He poured an abundant measure of this spirit upon us, through Jesus Christ, our Savior. 7 Thus, after being justified by the grace of that One, we can be heirs of hope of eternal life.

	8 Voronda ná i quetta, ar nati sine merin i tancave tulcal; sie i asávier Erusse polir tace sámaltar i cariesse máre cardaiva. Nati sine nar máre ar aşie atanin.
	9 Mal quera imle oa ho *auce centar ar ontaleparmar ar costier ar costi pa i Şanye, an taiti nati nar ú yáveo ar cumne. 10 Quera oa quén vintala únanwa peantie apa minya ar attea orie, 11 istala i taite quén equériexe i tiello ar úcára, nála námina insenen. 
	12 Íre mentan Artemas hya Ticico lyenna, cara ilqua ya polil tulien ninna Nicopolisse, an tasse *aşantien termare i hrívesse. 13 Á anta Sénas i *Şanyengolmon, ar Apollon, ilye maurettar lendattan, peniettan munta. 
	14 Mal nai véralvar yando paruvar care máre cardar ar quate i nírala mauri, uien pene yáve.
	15 Illi i ear asinye *suilar lye. Á *suila i melir me i saviénen.
	Nai i Erulisse euva as illi mici le!

	8 Faithful is the word, and these things I wish that you firmly establish; thus [those] that have believed in God can fix their minds on the doing of good works. These things are good and beneficial to men. 
	9 But turn yourself away from foolish inquries and genealogies and quarrelings and disputes about the Law, for such things are without fruit and empty. 10 Turn away anyone spreading untrue teaching after a first and a second warning, 11 knowing that such a person has turned himself from the path and is sinning, being judged by himself.
	12 When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do everything that you can to come to me in Nicopolis, for there I have decived to remain [-sse =] for the winter. 13 Give Zenas the Lawyer, and Apollo, all their [dual] needs for their journey, for them to lack nothing. 
	14 But may our own [people] also learn to do good works and fill the pressing needs, so as not to lack fruit.
	15 All that are with me greet you. Greet those who love us by the faith!
	May the grace of God be with all among you!
