Tatya Menta Yohanneo 

[The] Second Letter of John

---

I amyára i cílina herinna ar hínaryannar, i melin nanwiesse, ar lá inye erinqua, mal yando illi i istar i nanwie, 2 i nanwiénen ya ea vesse, ar euvas aselve tennoio. 3 Euvar aselve lisse, óravie ar raine ho Eru i Atar ar ho Yésus Hristo, i Ataro Yondo, nanwiénen ar melmenen.
	4 Samin i antúra alasse pan ihírien i queneli hínalyaron vantar i nanwiesse, ve i axan ya camnelve i Atarello. 5 Ar sí arcan lyello, a heri, lá ve qui técan lyen vinya axan, mal ta ya sámelve i yestallo: i melilve quén i exe. 6 Ar si ná i melme: i vantalve ve axanyar. Ta ná i axan, ve ahlárielde i yestallo, vantien sasse. 7 An rimbe *útulyandoli *eteménier mir i mar, i uar *etequenta Yésus Hristo túlienwa i hrávesse. Si ná i *útulyando ar i *Anahristo.
	8 Tira inde, i yar acárielve uar nauva len vanwe, mal camuvalde quanta *paityale. 9 Ilquen ye ua lemya Hristo peantiesse, mal mene han sa, ua same Eru. Ye lemya i peantiesse, sé same i Atar yo i Yondo. 10 Qui aiquen tule lenna lá túlula peantie sina, ávase came mir coaldar, ar áva *suila se. 11 An ye se-suila same ranta óse ulce cardaryassen. 
	12 Samin rimbe natali tecien lenna, mal uan mere care sie hyalinnen ar móronen. Ono samin i estel i tuluvan lenna ar quetuva aselde cendelello cendelenna, i alasselda nauva ilvana. 
13 Cílina néşalyo hínar *suilar lye.

The elder to the chosen lady and to her children, whom I love in truth, and not I alone, but also all who know the truth, 2 by the truth that is in us, and it shall be with us forever. 3 [There] will be with us grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ, the Father’s Son, by truth and by love. 
	4 I have the greatest joy because I have found that some of your children walk in the truth, according to the commandent that we received from the Father. 5 And now I ask of you, o lady, not as if I am writing to you a new commandment, but that which we had from the beginning: that we love one another. 6 And this is the love: that we walk according to his commandments. That is the commandment, as you [pl.] heard from the beginning, in order to walk in it. 7 For many deceivers [útulyandoli, ”misleaders”] have gone forth into the world, the ones that do not confess Jesus Christ [as] come in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the Antichrist.
	8 Watch yourselves, that the [things] we have done will not be lost to you, but you will receive full reward. 9 Everyone who does not remain in Christ’s teaching, but goes beyond it, does not have God. [He] who remains in the teaching, he has the Father and the Son. 10 If anyone comes to you not bringing this teaching, do not receive him into your houses, and do not greet him. 11 For [anyone] who greets him has a part with him in his evil deeds.
	12 I have many things to write to you, but I do not want to do so with paper and ink. But I have the hope that I will come to you and speak with you face to face, that your joy will be perfect.
	13 Your chosen sister’s children greet you [sg.]

