Yácovo Tecet

Letter of James

---

RANTA 1  
Yácov, Eruo ar i Heru Yésus Hristo mól, i nossin yunque yar nar vintaine: Hara máriesse!
	2 Hánonyar, íre samilde tyastier ilye nostaleron, nota ilye tai ve poica alasse, 3 istala, ve carilde, i tyastaina savielda care voronwe. 4 Mal lava voronwen telya mótierya, náveldan ilvane ar telyaine ilye natassen, pénala munta.

CHAPTER 1
James [/Jacob], slave of God and the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelves tribes that are scattered: Greetings! [Lit. "remain in happiness", a Tolkien-made Quenya greeting.]
	2 My brothers, when you meet [lit. have] tests of all kinds, count all those as pure joy, 3 knowing, as you do, that your tested faith works endurance. 4 But let endurance complete its work, for you to be perfect and completed in all things, lacking nothing.

	5 Sie, qui aiquen mici le pene sailie, nai arcuvas Erullo, ye anta illin, mérala ar ú narace quettaron, ar sailie nauva sen antaina. 6 Mal nai arcas saviesse, aqua ú iltance sanwion, an ye ná iltanca ná ve falma earo, mentaina i súrinen ar vávaina sir yo tar. 7 Áva lave taite neren intya i camuvas *aiqua i Herullo; 8 náse nér atwa sámo, iltanca ilye malleryassen.

	5 Thus, if anyone among you lacks knowledge, may he ask of God, who gives to all, willing[ly] and without harsh words, and wisdom will be given to him. 6 But may he [= let him] ask in faith, entirely without uncertain thoughts, for [he] who is uncertain is like a wave of [the] sea, sent by the wind and blown hither and thither. 7 Do not let such a man suppose that he will receive anything from God; 8 he is a man of a double mind, unsteady in all his ways.

	9 Mal nai i nalda háno samuva alasse pan náse carna arta, 10 ar i lára pan náse nucumna, an ve lóte i salqueo autuvas. 11 An Anar orta mi úre, ar hestas i salque, ar lóterya lanta oa ar vanima ilcerya fire. Sie yando i lára quén fifirúva endesse roitieryaron.
	12 Valima ná i nér ye perpere tyastiesse, an aqua tyestaina camuvas i ríe coiviéva, pa ya i Heru ánie vanda in melir se. 13 Nai quén ye ná tyestaina ua quéta: "Nanye tyestaina lo Eru." An Eru ua *tyestima ulcunen; ente, sé ua tyasta aiquen. 14 Mal ilquen ná tyestaina návenen túcina ar ºahtaina véra maileryanen. 15 Tá i maile, íre nostas, cole úcare, ar íre i úcare anaie cárina, tyaris qualme. 

	9 But may the lowly brother have joy since he is made exalted, 10 and the rich since he is humbled, for like a flower of the grass he shall pass away. 11 For the Sun rises in heat, and it withers the grass, and its flower falls off [or "away", oa], and its beautiful appearance fades [or, dies]. Thus also the rich person will fade in the midst of his pursuits. 
	12 Happy is the man who endures in [/under] test, for [when] wholly tested he shall receive the crown of life, concerning which the Lord has given promise to [those] who love him. 13 May a person who is [being] tested not be saying: "I am [being] tested by God." For God cannot be tested [lit. is not testable] by evil; furthermore, he does not test anyone. 14 But everyone is tested by being drawn and tempted by his own lust. 15 Then the lust, when it conceives, bears sin, and when the sin has been done, it causes death.

	16 Lava *úquenen tyare le ranya, melde hánonyar! 18 Ilya mára nat antaina ar ilya ilvana anna tule tarmenello, an tulis undu calaron Atarello: Pa sé ea munta ya ahya hya leo ya leve. 18 Pan mernes, vi-tyarnes ea i quettanen nanwiéno, návelvan minye yáveli onnaryaron. 
	19 Á ista nat sina, melde hánonyar: Ilya atanen mauya náve linta pa hlarie, lenca pa quetie, lenca pa orme; 20 an atano orme ua tyare Eruo failie tule. 21 Etta á panya oa ilya soa ar ulco, an ua ea maure ulcuva. Moicave cama i empanie i quettava ya pole rehta fealdar!

	16 Let no one cause you to stray, my beloved brothers! 18 Every good thing given and every perfect gift comes from on high, for it comes down from the Father of lights: Concerning him there is nothing that changes or a shadow that moves. 18 Since he wished, he caused us to exist by the word of truth, for us to be first fruits of his creatures.
	19 Do know this thing, my beloved brothers: For every man it is necessary to be quick about hearing, slow about speaking, slow about wrath; 20 for a man's wrath does not make God's justice come. 21 Therefore put away every filthiness and evil, for there is no need for [-va] evil. Gently receive the implanting of the word which can save your souls!

	22 Mal na carindoli i quetto, lá eryave *hlarindoli, tyárala inde ranya. 23 An qui aiquen ná *hlarindo i quetto, ar lá carindo, sana quén ná ve nér ye yéta hroaryo cendele cilintillanen. 24 An yétas inse, mal mí lú ya autas, ilcerya talta *réneryallo. 25 Mal ye ceºe i ilvana ºanye lériéva, ar perpere sasse – pan acáries inse, lá *hlarindo ye enyale munta, mal carindo moliéno – nauva valima molieryasse.
	26 Qui aiquen sana pa inse ve *tyerindo, ananta uas ture lambarya, mal lave endaryan ranya, tá quén sino *tyerme ná cumna. 27 I *tyerme ya ná poica ar ú vaxeo Ainolva i Ataren ná si: Cimie i mauri hínion ú ontaruo ar *verulóraron ºangieltasse, ar hepie immo ú vaxeo i mardello.

	22 But be doers of the word, not solely hearers, causing yourselves to stray. 22 For if anyone is a hearer of the word, and not a doer, that person is like a man who looks at the face of his body in [or 'with', -nen] a looking-glass [/a mirror]. 24 For he looks at himself, but in the moment that he goes away, his appearance slips from his memory. 25 But [he] who inquires into the perfect law of freedom, and endures in it – since he has made himself, not a hearer that recalls nothing, but a doer of labour – will be happy in his labour.
	26 If anyone thinks of himself as a worshiper, and yet he does not control his tongue, but lets his heart stray, then this person's worship is empty. 27 The worship that is clean and without stain to our God the Father is this: Heeding the needs of children without parents and of widows in their tribulation, and keeping himself [= oneself] without stain from the world.

RANTA 2
Hánonyar, lau cimilde cendeler mí imya lúme ya savilde mi Yésus Hristo Herulva? 2 An qui nér tule yomenieldanna, arwa cormalion maltava ar maira larmo, mal penya quén vára larmasse yando tule,  3 ar mi alasse camilde ye cole i maira larma ar quetir: "Elye hama sisse minda nómesse!", mal quetilde i penyanna: "Elyen ece tare", hya: "Hama tasse ara i tulco talunyant" 4 – tá notilde quelli mici le mirwe lá exeli, ar nalde námoli i quetir olce námier. Ma si ua nanwa? 

My brothers, surely you do not heed faces [= show favouritism] at the same time that you believe in Jesus Christ our Lord? 2 For if a man comes to your meeting, having rings of gold and a splendid raiment, but a poor person in a dirty raiment also comes, 3 and with [lit. in] joy you receive [the one] who has the splendid raiment and say: "You sit here in a prominent place!", but you say to the poor one: "You may stand!", or "Sit there by the support for my feet" – 4 then you count some among you more precious than others, and you are judges that pronounce wicked judgements. Is this not true?

	5 Á lasta, meldanyar: Ma Eru ua cille mar sino penyar náveltan láre saviesse ar aryoni i araniéno, pa ya antanes vanda in melir se? 6 Mal elde alálier i penyan áyarya. Ma láre queni uar lumna len ar tucir le epe námor? 7 Ma ualte nanquete i essenen yanen anelde yáline? 8 Carilde mai qui é lengalde i arna ºanyenen, ve i Tehtele quete: "Mela armarolya ve imle." 9 Mal qui cimilde cendeler, úcarilde, pan camilde *tulcarpie i ªanyello, pa racie sa.

	5 Listen, my beloved: Did God not choose the poor ones of this world for them to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom, concerning which he gave a promise to those who love him? 6 But you have denied the poor one his respect. Do rich people not oppress you and drag you before judges? 7 Do they not speak against the name by which you were called? 8 You do well if indeed you behave by the royal law, as the Scriptures say: "Love your neighbor as yourself." 9 But if you heed faces [= show favouritism], you sin, since you receive a rebuke from the Law, about breaking it.

	10 An aiquen ye himya i quanda ªanye, mal loita pa erya nat, arácie ilye i axani. 11 An ye quente: "Ávalye *úpuhta!", yando quente: "Áva nahta!" Qui ual *úpuhta, mal é nahtal, aráciel i ªanye. 12 Ve queni i nauvar námine i ºanyenen lériéva, sie alde carpa, ar sie alde lenga! 13 An ye ua care oravie, camuva námie ú óraviéno. Yellolissen oravie túrua namie.

	10 For anyone who keeps the entire Law, but fails concerning a single thing, he has broken all the commandments. 11 For [He] who said: "Do not fornicate!", also said: "Do not kill!" If you do not fornicate, but you do kill, you have broken the Law. 12 Like people that will be judged by the law of freedom, so you are to talk, and so you are to behave! 13 For who does not do mercy, will receive judgement without mercy. With [lit. in] triumphant cries mercy is conquering judgement.

	14 Manen ná aºea, hánonyar, qui quén quete i samis savie, mal uas same cardar? Lau i savie pole rehta se? 15 Qui háno hya néºa ná helda ar pene matso i auren, 16 ananta quén mici le quete téna: "Mena rainesse, na lauca ar quátina", mal uas anta tien hroalto mauri, manen ta ná aºea? 17 Sie yando savie, qui uas same cardar, ná insasse qualin.

	14 How is [it] beneficial, my brothers, if a person says that he has faith, but he does not have acts? Surely the faith cannot save him? 15 If a brother or a sister is naked and lacks bread for the day, 16 and yet [some] person among you says to them: "Go in peace, be warm and filled", but he does not give to them their body's needs, how is that beneficial? 17 Thus faith as well, if it does not have acts, is in itself dead.. 

	18 Ananta quén cé quetuva: "Elye same savie, ar inye same cardar." Ánin tana savielda hequa cardainen, ar inye lyen-tanuva savienya cardanyainen! 19 Savil i ea Eru er, lá? Caril mai. Yando i raucor savir – ar palir! 20 Mal ma meril ista, a cumna atan, i ú cardaron savie care munta mára? 21 Ma Avraham atarelva úne quétina faila apa *yances Ísac yondorya i *yangwasse? 22 Ve cenil, savierya móle as cardaryar, ar cardaryainen savierya náne carna ilvana. 23 Sie i tehtele náne *amaquátina ya quete: "Avraham sáve i Hérusse, ar ta náne nótina sen ve failie", ar anes estaina "i Héruo meldo". 
	24 Cenil i ná quén *failanta cardainen, ar lá saviénen erinqua. 25 Mí imya lé, ma Ráhav i *imbacinde úne *failanta cardalínen, apa camnes i larmor ar mentaner te oa hyana mallenen? 26 Ve i hroa ná qualin ú ºúleo, sie yando savie ú cardaron ná qualin.

	18 And yet a person will perhaps say: "You have faith, and I have acts." Show me your faith except by acts, and I shall show you my faith by my acts! 19 You believe that there is one God, no? You do well. The demons as well believe – and tremble! 20 But do you want to know, o empty man, that without acts faith does nothing good? 21 Was Abraham our father not pronounced [quétina = said] just after he sacrificed Isaac his son on the altar? 22 As you see, his faith worked with is acts, and by his acts his faith was made perfect. 23 Thus the scripture was fulfilled which says: "Abraham believed in the Lord, and that was counted to him as righteousness", and he was called "friend of the Lord".
	24 You see that a person is justified by acts, and not by faith alone. 25 In the same manner, was Rahab the harlot not justified by acts, after she received the spies and sent them away by another road? 26 Like the body is dead without breath, so also faith without acts is dead.

RANTA 3
Áva lave rimbalin mici le náve *peantari, hánonyar, an istalde i camuvalve ambe lunga námie. 2 An illi mici vi taltar rimbave. Qui aiquen ua talta quettasse, sé ná ilvana nér, ye yando pole ture quanda hroarya. 3 Qui panyalve *pérappar mir roccoron antor, carieltan ve merilve, mahtalve yando quanda hroalta. 4 Yé! Yando ciryar, ómu nalte ta hoe ar taure súri tyarir tai leve, nar túrine ampitya *tullanen, yanna i ciryaher mere.

Do not let numerous ones among you be[come] teachers, my brothers, for you know that we shall receive a heavier judgement. 2 For all among us slip [or, stumble] frequently. If anyone does not slip in a word, he is a perfect man, who can also control his entire body. 3 If we put bridles into the mouths of horses, for them to do as we want, we control also their entire body. 4 Behold! Also [/even] ships, though they are that big and mighty winds cause them to move, are controlled by a very small rudder, to where the helmsman [ciryaher = ship-lord] wants. 

	5 Sie yando i lamba ná pitya hroaranta, ananta laitaxe ita. Yé, manen pitya ná i náre ya pole narta ta hoa taure! 6 Ar i lamba ná náre! I lamba ná mar *úfailiéva mici hroarantalvar, an vahtas i quanda hroa ar narta i querma coiviéva, ar sá ná nartaina Ehennanen. 7 An ilya nostale hravani celvaron ar aiwion ar hlócion ar onnaron earesse anaier cárine núror Atanion. 8 Mal i lamba – ea *úquen mici Atani ye pole care sá núrorya. *Útúrima, ulca nat, nas quanta qualmetúlula hloimo. 9 Sánen aistalve i Héru ar Atar, ananta sánen yando hútalve atani i nar ontaine Eruo emmasse. 10 Et i imya antollo tulir aistie ar hútie. 
	Ua mára, hánonyar, i nati sine martar sie. 11 Ehtelesse, lisse ar sára nén ua ulya i imya assallo, lá? 12 Hánonyar, *relyávalda ua pole anta *milpior, hya liantasse *relyávi, lá? Mí imya lé, singwa nén ua pole anta lisse nén.
	
	5 Thus the tongue as well is a small body-part, and yet it boasts [lit. praises itself] greatly. Behold, how small is the fire that can kindle so great a wood! 6 And the tongue is a fire! The tongue is a world of unrighteousness among our body-parts, for it defiles the entire body and kindles the wheel of life, and it [sá, emphatic] is kindled by Gehenna. 7 For every kind of wild animals and of birds and of reptiles and of creatures in [the] sea have ben made servants of Men. 8 But the tongue – there is no one among Men who can make it his servant. An unruly, evil thing, it is full of death-bringing poison. 9 By it we bless the Lord and Father, and yet by it we also curse men that are created in God's image. 10 From the same mouth come blessing and curse.
	It is not good, my brothers, that these things occur so. 11 In a spring, sweet and bitter water does not flow from the same hole, no? 12 My brothers, a fig tree does not give olives, or a vine figs, no? In the same manner, salt water cannot give sweet water.

	13 Man ná saila ar handa mici le? Nai tanuvas cardaryar mára lengieryanen, i milya lénen sailiéva. 14 Mal qui samilde sára *hrúcen ar melme costiéva endaldasse, áva laita inde ar queta huruli i nanwienna. 15 Si ua i melme ya tule tarmenello, mal nas cemello – *celvavea, *raucea. 16 An yasse ear *hrúcen ar melme costiéva, tasse ear *úpartale ar ilya ºaura nat. 17 Mal i sailie tarmenello ná or ilqua poica. Ente, melis raine, nas milya, cimis exion nirme, nas quanta óraviéno ar máre yávion, uas cime cendeler, uas *imnetyala, 18 mal i erde yáveo failiéva ná rérina rainesse in carir raine. 

	13 Who is wise and intelligent among you? May he show his deeds by his good conduct, by the gentle manner of wisdom. 14 But if you have a bitter envy and a love of quarreling in your heart, do not praise yourselves and speak lies against the truth. 15 This is not the love that comes from on high, but it is from earth – animal-like, demonic. 16 For [in the place] where there is envy and a love of quarreling, there [there] is unorder and every foul thing. 17 But the wisdom from on high is above everything clean. Furthermore, it loves peace, it is gentle, it heeds the will of others, it is full of mercy and of good fruits, it does not heed faces [= is not partial], it is not hypocritical [lit. self-adorning], 18 but the seed of [the] fruit of righteousness is sown in peace for [those] that make peace.

RANTA 4
An mallo tulir ohtali, mallo ear costiéli mici le? Ma ualte tule silo: maileldallon, i ohtacarir mi hroarantaldar? 2 Merilde, mal ualde same. Nahtalde ar milyalde, ananta ualde pole came. Mahtalde ar ohtacarilde. Ualde same, pan ualde arca. 3 Arcalde, ananta ualde came, an arcalde &perqua castanen, sa-*yuhtien maileldasse alassiva i hráveo.
	4 Elde i racir vestale, ma ualde ista i qui mo ná nilda i marden, mo ná cotya Erun? 5 Etta, aiquen ye mere náve meldo i mardo care inse ñotto Eruo. 5 Hya ma sanalde i ú cesto i Tehtele quete: "*Hrucennen i faire ya mare vesse milyea" – ? 6 Mal ambe túra ná i Erulisse ya antas. Etta quetis: "Eru tare i &turquimannar, mal antas lisse i naldain."

For from where come wars, from where are there quarrels among you? Do they not come from here: from your lusts, that make war in your body-parts? 2 You desire, but you do not have. You slay and you long, and yet you cannot receive. You fight and you make war. You do not have, since you do not ask. 3 You ask [/pray, petition], and yet you do not receive, for you ask for a wrong reason, to use it on your lust for the joys of the flesh.
	4 You who break marriage, do you not know that if one is friendly to the world, one is hostile to God? 5 Therefore, anyone who wishes to be the world's friend makes himself an enemy of God. 5 Or if you think that [it is] without reason the Scripture says: "By envy the spirit that dwells in us is longing" – ? 6 But greater is the grace that he gives. Therefore he says: "God stands against the haughty ones, but he gives grace to the lowly ones."

	7 Etta á panya inde nu Eru, mal tara i Arauconna, ar uºuvas lello. 8 Tula hare Erunna, ar tuluvas hare lenna. Á poita máldat, a úcarindor, ar cara endalda poica, le arwe atwa sámo. 9 Á anta inde angayassen, sama nyére, lava níreldain ulya! Nai lalielda ahyuva mir nainie, ar alasselda mir nyére! 10 Nucuma inde mí Héruo hendu, ar le-ortuvas ama.

	7 Therefore submit yourselves to [lit. put yourselves under] God, but stand against the Devil, and he shall flee from you. 8 Come near to God, and he shall come near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and make your heart pure, you having a double mind. 9 Give yourselves to misery, have grief, let your tears flow! May your laughter change into lamenting, and your joy into grief! 10 Humble yourselves in the Lord's eyes, and he shall rise you up.

	11 Áva quete ulco quén pa i exe, hánor! Ye quete ulco pa háno hya name hánorya quete ana ºanye ar name ºanye. Mal qui namil ºanye, ual carindo ºanyeo, mal námo. 12 Ea Er ye antane i ªanye ar ná námo, sé ye pole rehta ar nancare. Mal elye, manen lertal name armarolya?
	13 Tula, sí, elde i quetir: "Síra hya enwa lelyuvalve osto sinanna ar lemyuvalve tasse ter loa, ar mancuvalve ar caruvar telpe" – ar elde uar ista manen coivielda nauva enwa! An nalde híºie, cénina mi ºinta lú ar tá autala. 15 Mí men, carnelde mai qui quentelde: "Qui i Heru mere, nauvalve en coirie ar yando care si hya ta." 16 Mal sí samilde *valate *immolaitieldainen. Ilya taite *immolaitie ná olca. 18 Etta, qui quén ista care ya ná vanima, ananta uas care sa, ta ná sen úcare.

	11 Do not speak evil one about the other, brothers! [The one] who speaks evil about a brother or judges his brother speaks against law and judges law. But if you judge law, you are not a doer of law, but a judge. 12 There is One who gave the law and is a judge, he who can save and undo. But you, how may you judge your neighbor? 
	13 Come, now, you who say: "Today or tomorrow we will go to this city and we will remain there for [ter, 'through'] a year, and we shall trade and make money" – and you do not know how your life will be tomorrow! For you are a mist, seen for [lit. 'in', mi] a short moment and then disappearing. 15 Instead, you did well if you said: "If the Lord wants, we shall still be alive and also do this or that." 16 But now you have pride by your boasts [*immolaitie, self-praise]. All such boasting is wicked. 18 Therefore, if a person knows [how] to do what is right, and yet he does not do it, that is to him a sin.

RANTA 5
Tula, sí, elde i nar láre; nírelissen á naina pa i nyéri yar túlar lenna! 2 Larelda uruxie, ar larmaldar nar mátine lo malwi; 3 i malta yo i telpe nar nwárine mir asto, ar i asto *vettuva lenna ar ammatuva hroalda. Nas ve náre, ta ya ocómielde i métime auressen! 4 Hlara! I *paityale yan i queni i *cirihtaner restaldar omótier, mal ya elde ehépier, yáma lenna! I *cirihtoron rambi utúlier hlarunna i Héruo Hossion. 5 Cemende asámielde úve ar coivie maileva. I auresse nahtiéva acárielde endalda tiuca. Anámielde, anahtielde i faila; uas pustane le.

CHAPTER 5
Come, now, you who are rich; in tears lament about the griefs that are coming upon you! 2 Your riches have crumbled, and your raiments are eaten by moths; 3 the gold and the silver are eroded into dust, and the dust shall witness against you and shall consume your body. It is like fire, that which you have gathered in the last days! 4 Hear! The payment for which the people that reaped your fields have laboured, but which you have kept, is crying [out] against you! The reapers' cries have come to the ears of the Lord of Hosts. 5 On earth you have had abundance and a life of lust. On the day of slaughter you have made your heart fat. You have judged, you have slain the just one; he did not stop you.

	7 Sama cóle, tá, tenna i Heru tule! *Cemendur yéta ompa cemeno mirwa yávenna; mauya sen same cóle tenna i miste alantie mi quelle ar tuile véla. 8 Sie mauya yando len same cóle ar huore, an i Heruo tulesse ná hare. 
	9 Áva sique quén i exenna, hya cé nauvalde námine. Yé! I Námo tára epe i fennar. 10 Hánor, para ho i lé yasse i *Erutercánoron –  i caramper mí Héruo esse – perpérer ulco ar sámer cóle. 11 Yé, estalve valime i eperpérier! Ahlárielde pa voronwerya Yóv ar istar i manar ya i Héru antane, manen i Héru same núra *ofelme ar ná quanta lisseo. 

	7 Have patience, then, until the Lord comes! A farmer looks forward to earth's precious fruit; it is necessary for him to have patience until the rain has fallen in autumn and spring alike. 8 Thus it is necessary also for you to have patience and courage, for the Lord's coming is near.
	9 Do not sigh one at the other, or maybe you will be judged. Behold! The Judge is standing before the doors. 10 Brothers, learn from the manner in which the prophets – who spoke in the Lord's name – endured evil and had patience. 11 Behold, we name happy [the ones] who have endured! You have heard or the steadfastness of Job and know the final end [manar, blissful outcome] that the Lord gave, how the Lord has deep sympathy and is full of grace.

	12 Or ilqua, hánonyar, áva anta vandar – menelden hya cemennen hya ilya hyana vandanen. Nai quetilde "ná, ná" – "vá, vá", hya lantuvalde nu námie.
	13 Ma ea aiquen mici le ye same perperie? Nai hyamuvas! Mal ea aiquen arwa alasseo? Nai linduvas airelíri! 14 Ma ea aiquen hlaiwa mici le? Nai yaluvas i amyárar i ocombeo, hyamieltan or se, *lívala se millonen i Héruo essenen. 15 Ar i hyamie saviéva tulúva mále i caimeassean, ar i Héru ortuva se. Ente, qui acáries úcareli, ta nauva sen apsénina.

	12 Above everything, my brothers, do not give oaths – by heaven [menel-nen > menelden] or by earth or by every [/any] other oath. May you say "yes, yes" – "no, no", or you will fall under judgement.
	13 But is there anyone that has hardship? Let him pray [lit. may he pray]! But is there anyone having joy? Let him sing psalms! [airelíri holy songs]. 14 Is there anyone sick among you? Let him call the elders of the congregation, for them to pray over him, annointing him with oil by the Lord's name. 15 And the prayer of faith will bring health to the bed-ridden one, and the Lord shall raise him up. Furthermore, if he has done [/committed] sins, that will be forgiven him.

	16 Etta queta pantave, quén i exenna, pa úcareldar; ar hyama quén i exen, náveldan nestaine. Faila queno arcande cole úvea túre íre móteas. 17 Elía náne nér arwa i imye felmion yar elve samir, ananta hyamiesse arcanes i ua lantumne miste, ar miste ua lantane ter loar nelde ar astar enque. 18 Ar hyamnes ata, ar menel antane miste ar i nóre colle yáverya. 
	19 Hánonyar, qui aiquen mici le ná tyárina ranya i nanwiello ar exe *nanquere se, 20 á ista si: Aiquen ye quere úcarindo malleryo loimallo rehtuva fearya qualmello ar tupuva liyúme úcarelion.

	16 Therefore speak openly, one to the other, about your sins; and pray one for the other, for you to be healed. A just person's petition [/prayer] carries abundant power when it is at work. 17 Elijah was a man having the same fealings that we have, and yet in prayer he asked that [there] would not fall rain, and rain did not fall for [ter, through] three years and six months. 18 And he prayed again, and heaven gave rain and the land bore its fruit.
	19 My brothers, if anyone among you is caused to stray from the truth and another turns him back, 20 know this: Anyone that turns a sinner from the error of his way will save his soul from death and will cover a host of sins. 

