Yúro Tenna

Letter of Jude

---

Yúr, Yésus Hristo mól, mal Yácovo háno, i yálinannar i nar méline lo Eru i Atar ar hépine Yésus Hriston: 2 Nai samuvalde óravie ar raine ar melme úvesse!
	3 A meldar, ómu ilya hormenen mernen tece lenna pa i rehtie yasse lé ar ní véla samir ranta, mauyane nin tece lenna hortien le: Á mahta i savien ya mi lú er ar illumen anaie antaina i airin! 4 An quelli fincave utúlier minna, i andanéya náner sátine námien lo i Tehtele – olcali, i querir i Erulisse mir ecie lehta lengiéno, ar lalar erya Cánolva ar Herulva, Yésus Hristo.

Jude, slave of Jesus Christ, but brother of Jacob [/James], to the called ones that are loved by God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ: 2 May you have mercy and peace and love in abundance!
	3 Beloved ones, though with every urgency I wanted to write to you about the salvation in which you and I alike have a part, it was necessary for me to write to you in order to exhort you: Fight for the faith that once [mi lú er, at one time] and for always has been given to the holy ones! 4 For some people have cleverly come in, that long ago were reserved for judgement by the Scriptures – wicked ones, who turn the grace into an opportunity for [-o = of] loose conduct, and deny our sole Leader and Lord, Jesus Christ.

	5 Merin *renta le, ómu istalde ilqua er lú illumen: I Héru, apa rehtie lie et Mirrandorello, epeta nancarne i uar sáve. 6 Ar i vali i uar himyane i meni yar sámelte i yestasse, mal hehtaner véra nómelta, asáties oialie nótelínen nu huine i námien mí túra aure. 7 Sie yando Sorom yo Omorra ar i ostor *os tú nar panyaine epe vi ve tanwa raxeo, an *úpuhtanelte ar sámer maile ettelea hráveva, ar sí acámielte i paime oialea náreva.

	I want to remind you, though you know everything once and for always: The Lord, after saving a people out of Egypt, thereafter destroyed the ones that did not believe. 6 And the angels that did not keep the positions that they had in the beginning, but abandoned their own place, he has reserved for everlasting bonds under gloom for the judgement on the great day. 7 Thus also Sodom and Gomorra and the cities around them are put before us as a sign of danger, for they fornicated and had a lust for foreign flesh, and now they have received the punishment of eternal fire.

	8 Sie yando sine oloste queni vahtar i hráve ar querir oa hére, naiquétala alcarinquannar.
9 Mal íre Mícael i Héra Vala costane as i Arauco ar sáme cos pa hroarya Móses, uas veryane quete senna yaiwenen, mal eques: «Nai i Héru *tulcarpuva lyenna!» 10 Ananta neri sine naiquetir ilye i natinnar yar ualte hanya, mal i nati yar é hanyalte – nasseltanen, ve celvar ú handeleo – tainen hastaltexer. 

	8 Thus also these dreamy people stain the flesh and turn away lordship, blaspheming against glorious ones. 9 But when Michael the Chief Angel quarreled with the Devid and had a dispute concerning the body of Moses, he did not dare to speak to him with mockery, but he said: «May the Lord rebuke you!» 10 And yet these men blaspheme against all the things that they do not understand, but the things that they do understand – by their nature, like animals without intellect – by those they corrupt themselves. 

	11 Horro tien, an avantielte mi tierya Cain, ar mir loimarya Valam hanteltexer, camien *paityale, ar nanacárielte inte mi amortierya Córa. 12 Té nar i ondor nurtaine nu nén merendildassen melmeva, mavalli i maitar inte ú caureo, lumbuli ú neno, cóline sir yo tar súrinen, aldali mi quelle, ú yáveo, lú atta quálienwe, túcine ama as ºundultar, 13 hravani falmali i earo, falastala vére castaltainen náven *naityana, ránie tinweli, in i huine morniéva ná sátina tennoio.
	14 É i otsea i ontalesse Atanello, Énoc, quente apacen pa té, quétala: «Yé! I Héru túle as airi *quaihúmeryar, 15 carien námie ilinnar, ar *tulcarpien ilye i olcannar pa ilye olce cardaltar yar acárielte olcave, ar pa ilye i naiquetier yar i olce úcarindor equétier senna.»

	11 Woe to them, for they have walked in the path of Cain, and into the error of Balaam they have thrown themselves, to receive reward, and they have undone themselves in the uprising of Korah. 12 They are the rocks hidden under water at your feasts of love, shepherds [mavalli = mavar-li] that feed themselves without fear, clouds without water, carried hither and thither by wind, trees in autumn, without fruit, two times having died, drawn up with their roots, 13 wild waves of the sea, foaming with their own reasons for being ashamed, errant stars, for whom the gloom of darkness is reserved forever. 
	14 Indeed the seventh in the descent from Adam [Atan = Man], Enoch, spoke a prophecy about them, saying: «Behold! The Lord came with his holy myriads [/tens of thousands], 15 in order to do [= carry out] judgement against all, and to give rebuke to all the wicked ones about all their wicked deeds that they have done wickedly, and about all the blasphemies that the wicked sinners have spoken against him.»

	16 Queni sine nar nurrula, quétala ulco pa umbartalta, vantala vére íreltassen, ar antoltar quetir hoe quettali; arwe lisso lambaltasse carpalte exennar véra *ñételtan. 
	17 Mal elde, a meldar, enyala i quetier quétine nóvo lo Yésus Hristo Herulvo aposteli, 18 manen quentelte lenna: «I métima lúmesse tuluvar quelli quétala yaiwe, vantala vére íreltassen olce nativa.» 19 Té nar i tyarir ºancier, neri ve celvar, pénala faire. 20 Mal elde, a meldar, á carasta inde amaire savieldanen, ar hyama Aire Feanen. 21 Sie hepa inde Eruo melmesse, íre yétalde ompa Yésus Hristo Herulvo óravienna, camien oira coivie. 22 Ente, alde órava i quenissen ion savie ná iltanca; 23 áte rehta *rapiénen te et i ruivello. Sine quenissen órava, mal cima, yeltala yando lanne vahtaina i hrávenen.
	24 Yen pole tire le lantiello ar panya le alahaste epe alcarerya arwe túra alasseo, 25 erya Erun, yen vi-rehta ter Yésus Hristo Herulva, na alcar, melehte, túre ar hére ter i quenda vanwa oiale ar sí ar tennoio! Násie!

	16 These people are grumbling, speaking evil about their fate, walking in their own desires, and their mouths speak big words; with honey on their tongue they speak to others for their own gain.
	17 But you, beloved ones, remember the saying spoken beforehand by the apostles of Jesus Christ our lord, 18 how they said to you: «In the last time [there] will come people speaking mockery, walking in their own desires of wicked things.» 19 They are the ones causing splits, men like animals, lacking spirit. 20 But you, beloved ones, build yourselves with your most holy faith, and pray with Holy Spirit. 21 Thus keep yourselves in God's love, while you look forward to the mercy of Jesus Christ our Lord, in order to receive eternal life. 22 Furthermore, have mercy on the people the faith of whom is unsteady; 23 save them by snatching them out of the fire. On these people have mercy, but take heed, loathing even a cloth stained by the flesh.
	24 To the one that can guard you from falling and put you unmarred before his glory with great joy, 25 to the one God, to the one who saves us through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty [or, might], power and lordship throughout the entire past eternity and now and forever! Amen!


